Title: 2606.24265v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.24265v1

Published Time: Wed, 24 Jun 2026 00:39:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
1

# Neural Ne twork -Based Parametric Model Reduc tion for 

# Predicting Turbulent Flow for Different Vehicle Geometries 

Kazuto Ando 1,2 ,3 , Rahul Bale 2,3, Akiyoshi Kuroda 1, Makoto Tsubokura 2,3   

> 1Operations and Computer Technologies Division, RIKEN Center for Computational Science
> 7-1-26 Minatojima -minami -machi, Chuo -ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650 -0047, J apan
> 2Complex Phenomena Unified Simulation Research Team, RIKEN Center for Computational Science ,
> 7-1-26 Minatojima -minami -machi, Chuo -ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650 -0047, J apan
> 3Department of Computational Science, Graduate School of System Informatics, Kobe University,
> 1-1, Rokkodai -cho, Nada -ku, Kobe, 657 -8501, Hyogo, Japan

Keywords: Parametric model reduction, Neural network, Turbulent flow, Vehicle body 

Abstract. Numerical simulations in industrial applications often require performing numerous high -precision 

computations parameterized by specific experimental conditions. For instance, in vehicle body design, 

aerodynamic simulations are essential for evaluating the aerodynamic characteristics of various proposed body 

geometries . However, computational resource constraints often become a bottleneck. Therefore, achieving the 

desired accuracy while minimizing computational cost is crucial. To address this cha llenge, model reduction 

methods have been developed to decrease the degrees of freedom by constraining the possible states of a physical 

system to a lower -dimensional subspace. In particular, reduction techniques that project the system onto a 

nonlinear su bspace using neural networks have been actively studied. Our previous research developed a reduced -

order model that integrates neural -network -based model reduction with a time -evolution method, implemented as 

a distributed parallel training framework to pr ocess high -resolution flow field data efficiently. In this study, we 

extend this reduction approach by incorporating a variational autoencoder to assess its robustness in high -

Reynolds -number flows around multiple vehicle bodies with varying geometries . Specifically, we evaluate the 

reconstruction accuracy of vortex generation across different spatial and temporal scales using a compact latent 

representation, with a particular focus on the flow behavior near the rear end of the vehicle body. 

1. Introduction 

Motivation 

Currently, the computational cost required for computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations 

continues to increase. One prominent example is large -scale computations performed on high -end 

supercomputer systems. Kato et al. [1] conducted large -scale LES ( Large Eddy Simulation ) on the 

Supercomputer Fugaku [2,3] using 458,752 MPI processes across 114,688 compute nodes with the flow 

solver “FrontFlow/blue” to analyze the turbulent flow dynamics around a ship body, utilizing 32 billion 

finite elements. Similarly, Jansson et al. [4] employed the spectral -element -based direct numerical 

simulation (DNS) code “Neko” to perform high -precision simulations of Rayleigh -Bénard convection 

using 16,384 GPUs on LUMI [5]. 

At the same time, there is an increasing demand for conducting numerous medium -scale simulations, 

particularly in industrial applications. For instance, multi -objective shape optimization [6] requires 

running multiple simulations with different shapes to evaluate and optimize aerodynamic performance. 

However, performing a large number of simulations that fully resolve the smallest scales of the physical 

phenomena of interest —such as vortices generated by turbulence —entails a substantial computational 

cost. Kasagi et al. estimate that the spatial scale of streamwise vortices generated around an automobile 

body ranges from 0.2 mm to 1 mm, while their temporal scale ranges from 100 Hz to 1000 Hz [7] ,

making direct simulations infeasible within a practical computational budget. 

Model reduction methods 

Various methods have been proposed in the CFD community to mitigate the computational burden of 

such simulations. One widely used approach is projection -based model reduction, which restrict a 

physical system’s states to a specific subspace and represents the system state using a small number of 2

representative variables (hereafter referred to as latent variables). Model reduction methods can be 

broadly categorized into linear and nonlinear approaches. 

A representative method in the former category is proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) [8], which 

identifies an optimal low -dimensional basis, called modes, to approximate a given dataset —such as 

time -series flow field data. Originally formulated for extracting coherent structures, POD has been 

extensively applied to the analysis of turbulent flows and the derivation of low -dimensional dynamical 

systems via Galerkin projection [9]. For computationally intensive scenarios invol ving large -scale 

multidimensional fluid simulation data, the "snapshot POD" approach introduced by Sirovich [10] has 

become indispensable, enabling efficient mode extraction by solving an eigenvalue problem based on 

temporal correlations rather than massiv e spatial dimensions. Building upon this computational 

foundation, POD -based reduced -order models (ROMs) have been successfully developed to capture 

complex, transient flow dynamics with high physical fidelity [11]. In contemporary fluid mechanics, 

POD rem ains a foundational tool among various data -driven modal analysis techniques [12], and its 

recent integration with emerging machine learning strategies is rapidly advancing the capability and 

stability of modeling highly nonlinear flow fields [13]. 

On the other hand, nonlinear reduction methods, which are well -suited for capturing the nonlinear 

behavior of flow fields, have also been proposed. A typical approach in this category is the neural -

network -based method, which extracts nonlinear modes from time -series instantaneous flow field data. 

Murata et al. proposed a neural network model called the mode -decomposing convolutional neural 

network autoencoder (MD -CNN -AE) to reduce the dimensionality of two -dimensional flow data around 

a circular cylinder [ 14 ]. They successfully represented the time evolution of the Kármán vortex street at 

Re = 100 using only two latent variables without significant reconstruction loss. 

In our previous study, MD -CNN -AE was extended to three -dimensional flow fields at a higher Reynolds 

number (Re = 1 ,000) [1 5] using large -scale distributed machine learning on the Supercomputer Fugaku. 

A three -dimensional flow around a cylinder, simulated using 28 million computational cells, was 

reduced to 64 latent variables, and the time series of these latent variables were predicted using a long 

short -term memory (LSTM) network [1 6]. Our reduction method, implemented via distributed machine 

learning, demonstrated scalability up to 25,250 computational nodes (1,212,000 cores) on Fugaku, with 

the convolution routine achieving over 100 PFLOPS in single -precision floating -point arithmet ic 

performance. 

Meanwhile, ongoing research focuses on parametric model reduction, which enables reduced -order 

simulations under different execution settings (e.g., object shape, Reynolds number) than those used 

during training. One example of this approach is the study b y Koo et al. [1 7], which predicts the time 

evolution of flow velocity in a reservoir pipe -valve (RPV) system using a POD -based reduced -order 

model. This model is parameterized with respect to two parameters: the height at the upstream end and 

the Reynolds number. POD extr acts basis functions from instantaneous flow fields generated for nine 

different parameter combinations using high -precision simulations. Finally, the accuracy of the reduced -

order model was evaluated for parameter values not included in these nine trainin g cases. A detailed 

classification of parametric model reduction methods is provided by Benner et al. [1 8], where techniques 

such as rational interpolation, balanced truncation, and POD are introduced, along with application 

examples including thermal modeling of electric motors, optimization of batch chromatography, and 

control of rod movement in nuclear rea ctor cores. 

Also, efforts have been made to optimize automobile body shapes in the latent space. Tran et al. [1 9]

obtained a low -dimensional representation of vehicle geometries using an autoencoder and, by learning 

the mapping between this representation and aerodynamic characteristics obtained from LES 

simulations, enabled the derivation of vehicle body shapes that meet the required aerodynamic 

performance through optimization in the latent space. 3

These studies primarily focus either on flows around simple geometries, such as bluff bodies, at 

Reynolds numbers on the order of a few hundred, or on the prediction of time -averaged flow fields 

rather than instantaneous flow fields. In contrast, from the perspective of industrial applications of 

simulation, more practical problems —namely, high -Reynolds -number flows around complex 

geometries that require detailed spatiotemporal resolution —have not been addressed using neural 

network -based reduced -order models. This is largely due to the lack of technologies for highly parallel 

distributed training and the computational resources necessary to realize them. 

In this study, we present a neural network -based reduced -order model designed for highly parallel 

distributed training. By incorporating a variational autoencoder (VAE), the proposed approach improves 

robustness to variations in object geometry. Furthermor e, using multiple real -world automobile 

geometries, we demonstrate its applicability to a highly practical problem from the perspective of 

industrial simulation —namely, the prediction of high -Reynolds number flows around previously unseen 

complex geometries .

Related works 

Hasegawa et al. [ 20 ] proposed a neural -network -based model reduction technique that combines a 

convolutional neural network autoencoder with a long short -term memory (LSTM) network. They 

evaluated the robustness of their model for two -dimensional flow around various randomly generated 

bluff body shapes. As a result, flow fields for approximately 20 bluff body shapes were successfully 

reproduced using a neural network trained on 80 shapes. 

Hasegawa et al. [ 21 ] further assessed the robustness of their method for two -dimensional circular 

cylinder flow at varying Reynolds numbers. In this study, Reynolds number information was fed into 

the LSTM network, allowing the model to successfully predict the flow field ar ound a circular cylinder 

at Reynolds numbers not included in the training data. 

Higashida et al. [ 22 ] investigated the robustness of our previously developed model reduction method 

[1 5] for two -dimensional flow around two distant square cylinders with varying inter -cylinder distances. 

A comprehensive comparison with POD across different inter -cylinder distances demonstrated that the 

proposed method outperforms POD in reconstructing flow fields at untrained distances. 

Contributions 

This study proposes a neural -network -based parametric model reduction method tailored for three -

dimensional high -Reynolds -number turbulent flow. This paper makes the following two contributions. 

First, a variational autoencoder (VAE) is introduced for dimensionality reduction. The enhancement in 

flow reconstruction accuracy obtained by incorporating a VAE into our previously proposed network 

architecture has been reported in a domestic conference [ 23 ]. A brief overview is provided below. 

The reconstructed flow fields obtained using conventional methods and the proposed approach are 

presented in Fig ure 1. In all cases, the flow fields are reconstructed from a reduced representation 

consisting of 64 variables using Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) and neural -network -based 

methods (MD -CNN -AE and MD -CNN -AE+VAE), enabling a direct and fair comparison of 

reconstruction capability under the same dimensionality constraint. 

Compared with the high -precision simulation results (full -order model), POD fails to reproduce the 

complex wake structures behind the cylinder, particularly in regions characterized by strong nonlinear 

interactions. In contrast, the neural -network -based approach (MD -CNN -AE) captures sign ificantly 

richer flow features, demonstrating its ability to represent nonlinear flow dynamics beyond the 

limitations of linear subspace methods. 

Furthermore, the proposed method (MD -CNN -AE+VAE) achieves a further improvement in 

reconstruction fidelity. It more accurately recovers the spatial complexity of the wake structures and 4

shows closer agreement with the full -order model across all observed regions. Notably, the spanwise 

flow components (vertical direction in the figures, bottom row), which are difficult to reconstruct using 

conventional approaches, are also successfully rep roduced. These results indicate that the incorporation 

of the variational autoencoder enhances the robustness and expressiveness of the reduced -order model, 

particularly for capturing high -dimensional and nonlinear flow features. 

Figure 1. Comparison of reconstructed flow fields generated by conventional and proposed 

methods for the reduced -order representation of the high -fidelity flow field. The rows correspond to 

the streamwise, vertical, and spanwise velocity components, while the column s compare the 

reference simulation results with reconstructions obtained using POD, MD -CNN -AE , and the 

proposed MD -CNN -AE + VAE method. 

Second, we demonstrated the applicability of the proposed method using eleven different realistic 

vehicle models. The proposed method predicts the time evolution of turbulent flow (Re ~ 8.4 × 10⁶) in 

the rear -end region of a vehicle body with varying shape s. To the best of our knowledge, applying a 

neural -network -based reduced -order model to predict three -dimensional turbulent flows around 

complex geometries at such high Reynolds numbers, particularly for unseen configurations, has not been 

reported in prev ious studies. This capability is enabled for the first time by our network architecture and 

its distributed parallel training algorithm. 

Organization of the Paper 

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces the proposed model reduction method, including 

training data generation, network architecture , and parallelization strategies. Section 3 presents the 

evaluation results of the proposed model reduction method for turbulent flow with varying vehicle body 

shapes. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper with a summary. 

2. Methods 

This section describes the method used to generate training data for this study, specifically the target 

flow field data for model reduction. It also introduces our neural -network -based parametric nonlinear 

reduction method, providing a detailed explanatio n of the neural network architecture and distributed 

parallel training approach. 

2.1. Training data 

This section explains how the training data used in this study was generated. High -precision three -

dimensional turbulent flow simulations were conducted using the simulation framework “CUBE” [ 24 ], 

developed by the Complex Phenomena Research Team at the RIKEN Center for Computational Science. 

CUBE is a unified simulation framework based on the Building Cube Method (BCM) [ 25 ,26] and the 

Immersed Boundary Method (IBM) [2 7,2 8].    

> Simulation POD MD -CNN -AE MD -CNN -AE + VAE
> Streamwise velocity
> Vertical velocity
> Spanwise velocity

5

Governing equations 

The governing equations for the flow simulations conducted in this study are defined as follows. The 

incompressible Navier -Stokes equations are given by 

𝜌 "𝜕 𝒖 

𝜕𝑡 + (𝒖 ∙ ∇)𝒖 + = −∇𝑝 + 𝜇 ∇!𝒖 + 𝒇 , (1)

𝜌 ∇ ∙ 𝒖 = 0, (2)

where 𝒖 represents the flow velocity vector, 𝑝 is the pressure , 𝜌 is the density , 𝜇 is the viscocity , and 𝒇 

is the force vector exerted by the immersed geometries in the fluid (the vehicle body in this study). 

The above equations are solved using a finite volume method on a hierarchical structured grid. No 

explicit turbulence model is employed; instead, an implicit large -eddy simulation (ILES) [29] approach 

is adopted, in which the effects of subgrid -scale vortices are implicitly accounted for through numerical 

dissipation. 

Problem settings 

This section describes the problem settings in this study. The computational domain extends over a large 

area surrounding the vehicle body , with a constant inflow entering in the positive X -direction (Figure 

2(a)). 

In contrast, the region used for training the machine learning model is restricted to the area behind the 

vehicle body (shown as the gray area in Figure 2(a)). This region is selected both due to computational 

resource constraints, which necessitate restricting the domain, and because, as reported in [ 30], the flow 

in this region is a dominant contributor to drag and is characterized by concentrated vortex shedding and 

recirculation. The computational grid becomes increasingly finer as it approaches the vehicle body’s 

surface, and within the training domain, the grid spacing is uniform and at its finest resolution (Figure 

2(b)). 

Figure 2. (a) Computational domain showing the inflow direction and overall geometry. (b) 

Training domain with uniformly refined grid spacing, highlighting the region used for model 

training. 

In this study, three -dimensional flow velocity fields were obtained from turbulent simulations performed 

under the same execution conditions (see Table 1) for 11 vehicle body models provided by Professor 

Takuji Nakashima from Hiroshima University (Figure 3(a)). 

These models were generated through principal component analysis (PCA) based on data from 124 

commercially available SUVs, each characterized by 22 side -view design variables , including roof 

length, hood length, and nose height (Figure 3( a)) . For each vehicle geometry, a vector representing the 

set of design variables is defined, and these vectors are concatenated column -wise to construct a matrix. 

PCA is then applied to this matrix to obtain eigenvectors and eigenvalues (principal component sc ores)   

> 24.9L
> 12.4 L
> 6.2L
> L
> Computational domain
> Training domain
> (a)
> Inflow
> 0.6L L
> 0.3L
> 0.4L
> Training domain (b)

6

that characterize the vehicle geometries. The first principal component score was varied from -1.5 to 1.5 

in increments of 0.3, resulting in 11 distinct models. 

These variations in shape lead to significant differences in aerodynamic performance. For instance, the 

maximum deformation in the X -direction at the rearmost position of the vehicle body is approximately 

12 cm (Figure 3(b)). 

Figure 3. (a) Vehicle body geometries generated using principal component analysis (PCA), where 

each model corresponds to a different principal component (PC1) coefficient. (b) Detailed view of 

shape variations at the rearmost region of the vehicle body, illustratin g the deformation associated 

with changes in the PCA coefficient. 

Table 1 provides a detailed description of the simulation settings used in this study. The computational 

domain is discretized into 200 million cells, with a Reynolds number of approximately 8.4 ×10 6. The 

sampling frequency for the training data is set to 0.5 ms to capture high -frequency fluctuations in the 

wake region. 

Table 1. Simulation parameters and conditions. 

Flow s olver type Incompressible flow solver 

Computational domain size 114 m × 57 m × 28 m

Vehicle model size 4.6 m × 2.0 m × 1.5 m

Number of cubes 48,980 

Cells per cube 16 × 16 × 16 = 4,096                  

> ①ルーフ長さ /全長 ⑫全高 /全長
> ②キャビン長さ /全長 ⑬ノーズ高 /全高
> ③フード長さ /全長 ⑭ノーズスラント量
> /フード長さ
> ④L2/ 全長 ⑮基調ライン基点高さ
> /全高
> ⑤ホイールベース /全長 ⑯ベルトライン高 /全高
> ⑥基調ライン基点長さ
> /ホイールベース
> ⑰FR バンパー下端 /全高
> ⑦前輪 -Lの長さ
> /ホイールベース
> ⑱RR バンパー下端 /全高
> ⑧FR オーバーハング /全長 ⑲サイドシル下端 /全高
> ⑨RR オーバーハング /全長 ⑳基調ライン角
> ⑩RR オーバーハング
> /FR オーバーハング
> ㉑RR ウィンドウ傾斜角
> ⑪H1/L1 ㉒FR ウィンドウ傾斜角

Design Parameters from Side View of SUV [31] 

> Principal Component Analysis

First Principal Component 

Matrix of Design Variables for Each Body     

> Vehicle
> Body 1
> Design
> Variable 1
> ・・・
> Design
> Variable !
> ・・・
> ・・・
> Design
> Variable "
> ・・・

!!" 

!## 

!$% 

!#% 

!$# 

!#" 

!$" 

!!# !!%      

> ・・・ ・・・
> ・・・ ・・・
> ・・・ ・・・
> ・・・  ・・・
> ・・・  ・・・
> ・・・  ・・・
> ・・・
> ・・・
> ・・・
> ・・・
> Vehicle
> Body #
> Vehicle
> Body $

PC1= -1.5 PC1= -1.2 PC1= -0.9 PC1=0.3 PC1=0.6 PC1=0.9 PC1= -0.6 PC1=0.0 PC1= -0.3 PC1=1.2 PC1=1.5 

PC1 

(a) 

Deformation 

Deformation 

(b) 7

Total number of cells 48,980 × 4,096 = 200,622,080 

Minimum cell size 7.0 mm 

Time step size 2.5 × 10 -5 s

Sampling frequency 0.5 ms (per 20 steps) 

Integration time 1.75 s (70,000 steps) 

Inflow velocity 27.78 m/s (100 km/ h)

Reynolds number ~ 8.4 × 10 6

Time integration scheme Crank -Nicolson method 

Pressure Poisson solver V-cycle multigrid 

Viscous term discretization Seco nd -order central difference 

Convection term discretization QUICK scheme 

2.1. Training strategy 

This section provides details on network training, including the network architecture, loss function, and 

distributed parallel training method .

Network architecture 

The schematic of the entire network architecture used in this study is shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Overview of the proposed neural network architecture, consisting of an encoder that 

extracts latent representations from the input data and a branched decoder structure that reconstructs 

multiple output fields from each latent vector element .

The first half of the network, called the encoder, reduces the high -dimensional flow field data and 

outputs a low -dimensional representation called the latent vector. The encoder consists of multiple layers 

of blocks composed of three -dimensional convoluti onal layers and pooling layers. To stabilize training, 

layer normalization is applied to the output of each layer.   

> Input flow field !
> "
> #
> $
> Flatten Input
> FCN
> Output
> Reconstructed flow field !%
> Unf latten
> Unf latten

+            

> !
> "
> #
> Decomposed flow field &
> Combine
> '!
> (!
> "
> '#
> (#
> "
> )('!,(!
> ")
> )('#,(#
> ")
> Latent vector -
> … Unf latten '$
> ($"
> )('$,($")
> … …
> Decomposed flow field 1
> Decoder 1
> Decoder /
> Decoder &
> Encoder
> 3D Convolution 3D Pooling 3D Convolution 3D Interpolation

8

In contrast, the latter half of the network, called the decoder, is branched, with each branch having its 

own parameters (where the branched decoder has the same structure as that of MD -CNN -AE ). Each 

branch expands the dimension from a single element of the latent vector to a decomposed flow field, 

which has the same dimensions as the original high -dimensional flow field data. The decoder consists 

of multiple layers of blocks composed of convolu tional layers and interpolation layers. Finally, the 

decomposed flow fields are combined, producing the reconstructed flow field. Training is performed to 

minimize the error between the original and reconstructed flow fields. Once training has sufficiently 

progressed, the network can effectively map high -dimensional flow field data to a low -dimensional 

representation. 

This procedure corresponds to the decomposition of the flow field into multiple nonlinear modes, with 

mode information preserved as network parameters. The number of decompositions in the decoder is a 

user -defined hyperparameter, which is equal to the dime nsionality of the latent vector. The smaller this 

value, the higher the reduction (compression) efficiency. However, there is a trade -off: reducing the 

latent dimension decreases reconstruction accuracy. It should be noted that a large number of branches 

(modes) is required to efficiently reduce highly nonlinear flows, such as high -Reynolds -number 

turbulent flows. The detailed network structure is provided in Table A.1 and A.2 in Appendix A. 

Formulation of the Problem to Be Solved by the Neural Network 

The loss function is formulated as follows: 

𝐿 7𝑿 (𝑡 ), 𝑿 9(𝑡 ), 𝝓 , {𝜽 " }"#$ 

> %

> = ?𝑿 (𝑡 ) − 𝑿 9(𝑡 )?!

> !

𝑁 + 𝐷 &' 7𝑞 (7𝒛 (𝑡 )D𝑿 (𝑡 )>?𝑝 7𝒛 (𝑡 )>>, (3)

where 𝑿 (𝑡 ) is the high -precision simulation result of the flow field (i.e., the input data of the network) 

at time 𝑡 , while 𝑿 9(𝑡 ) is the reconstructed flow field (i.e., the output data of the network) at time 𝑡 .

𝐷 &' represents the Kullback –Leibler (KL) divergence ,

𝐷 &' 7𝑞 (7𝒛 (𝑡 )D𝑿 (𝑡 )>?𝑝 7𝒛 (𝑡 )>> = F 𝑞 (7𝒛 (𝑡 )D𝑿 (𝑡 )> log 𝑞 (7𝒛 (𝑡 )D𝑿 (𝑡 )>

𝑝 7𝒛 (𝑡 )> 𝑑 𝒛 , (4)

where 𝑞 (7𝒛 (𝑡 )D𝑿 (𝑡 )> is the posterior distribution of the latent vector 𝒛 (𝑡 ) given the input flow field 

𝑿 (𝑡 ).

𝑝 7𝒛 (𝑡 )> is the standard normal distribution, representing the prior probability distribution of the latent 

vector 𝒛 (𝑡 ):

𝑝 7𝒛 (𝑡 )> = 𝒩 (𝒛 (𝑡 ); 𝟎 , 𝐈 ). (5)

The optimization problem solved during training is formulated as follows: 

𝝓 , {𝜽 "}"#$ 

> %

= argmin 𝝓 ,{𝜽 !}!"# 

> $

W 𝐿 7𝑿 (𝑡 ), 𝑿 9(𝑡 ), 𝝓 , {𝜽 "}"#$ 

> %

>,

> .%&'
> .%!$

(6)

where 𝝓 represents the network parameters of the encoder, 𝜽 " is the network parameters of the 

decoder corresponding to the 𝑖 -th mode , and 𝑛 is the number of modes (i.e., the number of decoders or 

the number of latent variables). 𝑡 /"% and 𝑡 /01 denote the start and end points of the training time 

interval, respectively .

The reconstructed flow field 𝑿 9(𝑡 ) can be expressed as follows: 

𝑿 9(𝑡 ) = W 𝓕 234 (𝑧 "(𝑡 ); 𝜽 " ),

> %
> "#$

(7)

where 𝓕 234 represents the decoder neural network, and 𝑧 "(𝑡 ) is the latent variable corresponding to the 

𝑖 -th mode at time 𝑡 .9

𝒩 (𝒛 (𝑡 ); 𝝁 (𝑡 ), 𝝈 (𝑡 )!) is the normal distribution with mean 𝝁 (𝑡 ) and variance 𝝈 (𝑡 )!, which represents 

the probability distribution of the latent vector 𝒛 (𝑡 ):

𝒛 (𝑡 ) ~ 𝒩 (𝒛 (𝑡 ); 𝝁 (𝑡 ), 𝝈 (𝑡 )!). (8)

𝝁 (𝑡 ) and 𝝈 (𝑡 )2 are obtained as follows: 

𝝁 (𝑡 ), 𝝈 (𝑡 )! = 𝓕 3%4 (𝑿 (𝑡 ); 𝝓 ), (9)

where 𝓕 3%4 represents the encoder neural network. 

During the inference phase, the input flow field data is reconstructed using the trained network 

parameters 𝝓 and {𝜽 " }"#$ 

> %

as follows :

𝑿 9(𝑡 ) = W 𝓕 234 (𝜇 "(𝑡 ); 𝜽 " ),

> %
> "#$

(10 )

𝝁 (𝑡 ), 𝝈 (𝑡 )! = 𝓕 3%4 (𝑿 (𝑡 ); 𝝓 ). (11 )

Note: In the inference phase, the latent variable used as input to the decoder is the mean of the normal 

distribution representing the probability of the latent variables. In other words, during training, the 𝑖 -th 

component of the random variable 𝒛 (𝑡 ) sampled from the normal distribution defined in Eq. (8) is 

provided as an input to Eq. (7), whereas during inference, the 𝑖 -th component of mean value 𝝁 (𝑡 ) of the 

distribution is used instead . This means that the decoder operates deterministically, rather than using 

probabilistic sampling. 

Distributed parallel training 

All the experiments in this study were conducted on the Supercomputer Fugaku (hereafter, Fugaku). 

Fugaku is equipped with a single Fujitsu A64FX CPU per node. The A64FX processor has 48 

computational cores, each achieving 128 GFLOPS in single -precision flo ating -point arithmetic 

performan ce . Consequently, each node delivers 6.1 TFLOPS of single -precision performance. 

For comparison, a high -end GPU, the NVIDIA H100 NVL [32], attains 60 TFLOPS for single precision 

(excluding tensor -core operations), which is approximately 10 times higher than the performance of a 

single A64FX processor. To close this gap, it is necessary to utilize a large number of nodes on Fugaku, 

requiring an efficient distributed (inter -node) parallel training mechanism. 

To address this issue, in our previous work, a distributed parallel training framework was implemented 

using hybrid parallelism, which combines data parallelism and network architecture -specific model 

parallelism [1 5]. This framework has demonstrated scalability, allowing training execution to scale up 

to tens of thousands of nodes (millions of cores). 

Table 2 presents the execution settings for distributed training. Notably, this study aims to reconstruct a 

flow field represented by 20 million variables using only 32 latent variables. Two experiments are 

conducted for comparison: 

• Experiment 1: Training on flow fields around six vehicle body shapes. 

• Experiment 2: Training on flow fields around two vehicle body shapes. 

The sampling interval of the instantaneous fields used as training data is identical to the output interval 

of the simulation. Specifically, a value of 0.5 ms, denoted as “Sampling frequency” in Table 1, is adopted. 

As mentioned above, this choice is inten ded to resolve vortices at 100 Hz over 20 -time steps. 

A detailed explanation of the hyperparameters used for neural network training is provided in Table A.3 

in Appendix A. 

Table 2. Execution settings for distributed training. 10 

Target physical variables for training Three -dimensional flow velocity ( 𝑢 , 𝑣 , 𝑤 )

Target region 0.6L × 0.4L × 0.3L 

Grid resolution 384 × 288 × 192 = 21 ,233 ,664 

Number of latent variables 

(i.e., number of decomposition modes) 

32 

Grid spacing 7.0 mm (uniform resolution )

Sampling interval 0.5 ms

Shapes used for inference Experiment 1: PC1 = -1.5, -0.9, -0.3, 0.3, 0.9, 1.5 

Experiment 2: PC1 = -1.5, 1.5 

Shapes for inference PC1 = -1.2, -0.6, 0.0, 0.6, 1.2 

Training samples per shape 492 

Total training samples Experiment 1: 492 × 6 = 2,952 

Experiment 2: 492 × 2 = 984 

Total training iterations 12,000 (2 ,000 epochs) 

Number of snapshots generated during inference 500 

Integration time for inference 0.25 s 

Figure 5 illustrates which of the 11 vehicle body shapes were used for training or testing in each 

experiment. 

Figure 5. Vehicle body shapes used for training and testing, parameterized by the principal 

component (PC1) coefficient. Shapes highlighted in red and blue indicate the subsets assigned to the 

training and testing datasets , respectively .

The computational resources required during training are summarized in Table 3. These experiments 

demanded substantial computational power: Experiment 1 consumed 1 million node hours, while 

Experiment 2 required 340,000 node hours on Fugaku. 

Table 3. Computational resource requirements for training .

Number of compute nodes used Experiment 1: 8,118 nodes ( 389 ,664 cores) 

Experiment 2: 2,706 nodes ( 129 ,888 cores) 

Theoretical peak 

single -precision performance 

Experiment 1: 6.1 TFLOPS × 8,118 nodes = 49 .8 PFLOPS 

Experiment 2: 6.1 TFLOPS × 2,706 nodes = 16 .6 PFLOPS 

Training time per epoch Experiment 1: 48 s 

Experiment 2: 46 s 

Total training iterations 60,000 iter ations (10,000 epochs )

Total training time Experiment 1: (48 / 3600) hour ×10,000 epochs = 133 hours 

Experiment 2: (46 / 3600) hour ×10,000 epochs = 127 hours                            

> PC1= -1.5 PC1= -1.2 PC1= -0.9 PC1=0.3 PC1=0.6 PC1=0.9 PC1= -0.6 PC1=0.0 PC1= -0.3 PC1=1.2 PC1=1.5
> PC1
> Exp. 1 ✔✔✔✔✔✔✔✔✔✔✔
> Exp. 2 ✔✔✔✔✔✔✔
> Training data Test data

11 

Estimated total computational cost Experiment 1: 8,118 nodes × 133 hours = 1.0 × 10 6 node -hours 

(corresponds to 6.6 ExaFLOP) 

Experiment 2: 2,706 nodes × 127 hours = 3. 4 × 10 5 node -hours 

(corresponds to 2.2 ExaFLOP) 

3. Results and discussion 

This chapter presents the evaluation results of the proposed model reduction method for the two 

experiments. The first experiment, referred to as “Experiment 1 ,” evaluates model reduction using a 

network trained on flow fields around six vehicle body shapes. The second experiment, referred to as 

“Experiment 2 ,” evaluates model reduction using a network trained on flow fields around two vehicle 

body shapes. 

3.1. Training Progress and Convergence Status 

Figure 6 illustrates the decay of the normalized training error as the number of training iterations 

progresses in Experiment 1 and Experiment 2. The training error decreases monotonically with each 

iteration; however, at the current stage of training (12,000 iterations), the decrease in training error 

remains incomplete and has not yet saturated in either experiment. Therefore, the accuracy of the model 

reduction presented in this chapter can be further improved by continuing the training. At 12,000 

iterations, more than 99% of the total loss is attributed to the reconstruction loss. This indicates that, at 

this stage, the reconstruction loss aimed at improving flow -field fidelity is overwhelmingly dominant 

over the KL divergence term, which regularizes the latent distribution toward a standard normal 

distribution. As training progresses, however, the reconstruction loss is expected to decrease by orders 

of magnitude, at which point the influence of the KL divergence constraint is expected t o become more 

significant. 

Figure 6. Comparison of loss convergence over training iterations for Exp. 1 (blue) and Exp. 2 

(orange). While both experiments exhibit similar loss values in the early stage, their behaviors 

diverge after approximately 10² iterations. 

3.2. Extracted modes 12 

Figure 7 illustrates the time variation of selected latent vector elements corresponding to the flow field 

around the PC1= 0.0 shape as an example. This value corresponds to 𝑧 " (𝑡 ) in Equation (7).

Comparing the results of Experiment 1 and Experiment 2, some elements, such as 𝑧 $ exhibit correlations 

between the values from both experiments. In contrast , certain elements, such as 𝑧 6, appear to have no 

correlation. This is likely because the spatial scale of flow fluctuations associated with a specific mode 

number depends on runtime conditions. For the graphs of all latent variables, see Figure B.1 in Appendix 

B. 

Figure 7. Representative temporal evolution of latent vector components z 1–z4

for PC1 = 0.0. The trajectories compare Exp. 1 (blue, trained with 6 shapes) and Exp. 2 (orange, 

trained with 2 shapes), highlighting differences in amplitude and temporal patterns across latent 

dimensions. 

Figure 8 presents a snapshot of the fluctuation component of the decomposed flow field, consisting of 

the three directional components of the flow velocity vector, corresponding to the first mode, i.e., 

𝓕 234 (𝜇 $(𝑡 ); 𝜽 $) in Equation ( 10 ).

In Experiment 1, the flow field structure exhibits a more spatially continuous distribution compared to 

Experiment 2, although it cannot be regarded as fully physically natural. In contrast, the result of 

Experiment 2 shows a more pronounced spatial discon tinuity. This is likely because Experiment 1 was 

trained using flow fields around a greater variety of geometries than Experiment 2, resulting in a more 

accurate representation of the global flow structures. 

For the decomposed flow field corresponding to all modes, see Figure B.2 and B.3 in Appendix B.   

> XY
> Z
> !
> XY
> Z

! 

> XY
> Z

"13 

Figure 8. Snapshots of the fluctuating components of the decomposed flow field at PC1 = 0.0. The 

streamwise (u), spanwise (v), and vertical (w) velocity components are shown for Exp. 1 (top row) 

and Exp. 2 (bottom row). The schematics above indicate the coordinate s ystem and velocity 

directions. 

3.3. Evaluation of Model Reduction Accuracy 

This section evaluates the accuracy of the model reduction, i.e., how well the original flow field —which 

was not used for training —can be reconstructed from 32 latent variables using the proposed method. 

First, the reconstructed flow fields, including the three directional components of the flow velocity 

vector , 𝑿 9(𝑡 ) in Equation ( 10 ), are compared between Experiment 1 and Experiment 2. The vorticity in 

the y -direction ( 𝜔 7 ) and velocity divergence , computed from this velocity field, are also analyzed. As 

an example, the flow field around shape PC1= 0.0 is shown in Figure 9.

For the flow velocity field, both Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 successfully reproduce the overall flow 

structure observed in the reference high -precision simulation results. However, in Experiment 2, as 

observed in the decomposed flow field described earl ier, the spatial continuity of the flow velocity is 

lost, resulting in a physically less realistic flow field. This suggests that Experiment 1 achieves higher 

reduction accuracy for the velocity field. 

On the other hand, in the vorticity field, both Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 reproduce the clockwise 

vortex near the roof of the car body and the counterclockwise vortex near the bottom. However, it 

appears that the absolute value of the vorticity is more accurately reproduced in Experiment 2 than in 

Experiment 1. Although Experiment 2 shows higher accuracy in terms of vorticity magnitude, this does 

not necessarily indicate better generalization performance. Since Experiment 2 is trained on a smaller 

set of geometries, the model tends to specialize in representing specific flow structures, resulting in 

sharper vortical features. In contrast, Experiment 1, trained on a wider range of geometries, captures 

more g eneralized flow behavior, which leads to smoother but slightly underestimated vorticity fields. 

This suggests a trade -off between generalization capability and the accuracy of local flow structures. 

The spatial distribution of velocity divergence is also shown on the right side of Figure 9. In the reference 

simulation results, the divergence remains close to zero throughout the domain, whereas in Experiment 

1 it deviates from zero with both positive and negative values. In Experiment 2, the magnitude of this 

deviation is further increased c ompared to Experiment 1. These results indicate that, while the reference 

simulation satisfies mass conservation, the flow fields reconstructed in Experiments 1 and 2 violate mass 

conservation. However, in a relative sense, Experiment 1 exhibits more physi cally consistent behavior 14 

than Experiment 2. For the complete flow fields around other shapes, see Figures C.1 –C.4 in Appendix 

C. 

Figure 9. Snapshots of reconstructed flow fields from 32 latent variables at PC1 = 0.0. The 

streamwise (u), spanwise (v), vertical (w) velocity components, vorticity , and velocity divergence 

are shown for the reference field (top row), Exp. 1 (middle row), and Exp. 2 (bottom row). The 

schematics above indicate the coordinate system and velocity directions. 

To confirm the three -dimensional structure of the vortex, the instantaneous flow field of the Q -criterion 

(the second invariant of the velocity gradient tensor) isosurface for PC1= 0.0 is shown in Figure 10 . The 

Q-criterion is formulated as follows: 

𝑄 = 1

2 (‖Ω‖! − ‖𝑆 ‖!), (10 )

where Ω and 𝑆 represent the rate of rotation tensor and the rate of strain tensor, respectively. 

The results of Experiment 1 indicate that the three -dimensional vortex structures observed in the high -

precision simulation results are qualitatively reproduced. In particular, the large -scale coherent wake 

structures and their spatial distributions show g ood agreement with the reference field, suggesting that 

the dominant flow characteristics are successfully captured. In contrast, the results of Experiment 2 

deviate from the high -precision simulation results, as the vortices appear finer in scale and are more 

uniformly distributed throughout the computational domain. This suggests that small -scale fluctuations 

are overrepresented, while the large -scale coherent structures are less accurately reproduced. This 

difference is likely because Experiment 1 was trained on flow fields around a larger number of 

geometries, allowing it to learn the global characteristics of the turbulent wake more effectively. 

For the Q -criterion isosurfaces around other shapes, see Figures D.1 –D.4 in Appendix D.        

> XY
> Z
> !"#
> XY
> Z
> !
> XY
> Z
> "
> XY
> Z
> !!
> XY
> Z
> $

15 

Figure 10 . Instantaneous Q -criterion isosurfaces colored by velocity magnitude at PC1 = 0.0 for the 

reference field (left), Exp. 1 (center), and Exp. 2 (right). 

Figure 11 illustrates the energy spectrum at the probe point located at the rear end of the vehicle body. 

In Experiment 1, the amplitude of the high -frequency components more closely matches the high -

precision simulation results than in Experiment 2. This indicates that Experiment 1 achieves higher 

reproduction accuracy for eddies with small time scales compared to Experiment 2. Furthermore, 

Experiment 1 reproduces the overall spectral distribution more consistently across a wide frequency 

range. In contras t, Experiment 2 exhibits a more rapid attenuation in the high -frequency region, 

indicating a loss of small -scale turbulent fluctuations. These results suggest that Experiment 1 better 

preserves the temporal characteristics of the turbulent wake and capture s a broader range of turbulent 

scales. 

For the spectra corresponding to other shapes, see Figure E.1 in Appendix E. 

Figure 11. Comparison of energy spectra at a specific probe point in the vehicle wake. (Left) The 

plot shows the non -dimensional energy spectrum ( 𝑢𝑢 𝑈 839 

> !

⁄ ) against the non -dimensional frequency 

(𝑓𝐿 𝑈 839 ⁄ ) for the reference case and two experiments. (Right) The schematic illustrates the location 

of the measurement probe (red dot) in the wake region behind the vehicle model, defining the 

reference velocity 𝑈 839 and vehicle length 𝐿 

> !
> "!"#

16 

Figure 12 illustrates the probability density function (PDF) of vorticity for PC1 = 0.0. For 𝜔 7, both 

Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 show reduced reproduction accuracy in regions with large absolute 

values, corresponding to intense small -scale vortical structures. This suggests that strong and localized 

vortices are more difficult to reconstruct than moderate vorticity regions. 

In contrast, for 𝜔 :, Experiment 2 shows good agreement with the reference high -precision simulation 

results even in regions with large absolute values. This is likely because the vehicle geometries vary 

mainly along the longitudinal direction, while little variation exists i n the left –right direction. As a result, 

the 𝜔 : distribution is less sensitive to shape differences than 𝜔 7 , leading to similar statistical 

characteristics across different vehicle configurations. 

These results indicate that the prediction accuracy depends not only on the magnitude of vorticity but 

also on the degree of geometric variability associated with each flow component. 

For the PDFs corresponding to other shapes, see Figure F.1 in Appendix F. 

Figure 12. Probability density functions (PDFs) of vorticity in the vehicle wake. The top schematics 

define the analysis planes for the y -component ( 𝜔 7, left) and z -component ( 𝜔 :, right) of vorticity 

within the wake region behind the vehicle body. The bottom plots show the corresponding PDFs, 

comparing the reference (Ref.) and two experimental setups (Exp. 1 and Exp. 2). 

Figure 1 3 illustrates the trajectory of a physical system in phase space, spanned by three variables: 

turbulent kinetic energy (TKE), TKE production, and TKE dissipation for PC1= 0.0. These quantities 

are formulated as follows: 

Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE): 

F 𝑘𝑑𝑉 

> ;

= F 1

2 7𝑢  

> ′!

+ 𝑣  

> ′!

+ 𝑤 

> ′!

>𝑑𝑉 

> ;

, (11 )

Production of TKE: 

F 𝑃𝑑𝑉 

> ;

= F −𝑢 

> ′

𝑣  

> ′

𝑑𝑈 

𝑑𝑦 ;

𝑑𝑉 , (12 )

Dissipation of TKE: 

F 𝐷𝑑𝑉 

> ;

= F 𝜈 (‖∇𝑢 <‖! + ‖∇𝑣 <‖! + ‖∇𝑤 <‖!)

> ;

𝑑𝑉 , (13 ) 

> XY
> Z

!! 

> XY
> Z

## !!17 

where 𝑘 represents the TKE, 𝑃 is the TKE production rate, 𝐷 is the TKE dissipation rate, 𝑉 is the target 

training region, and 𝑈 is the mean streamwise velocity. 

In both Experiment 1 and Experiment 2, the trajectories in phase space deviate from those of the high -

precision simulation results, indicating that the balance among turbulent kinetic energy production, 

transport, and dissipation is not fully reproduced. I n particular, the trajectories form distinct clusters 

separated from the reference field in the 𝑃 -𝑘 , 𝑃 -𝐷 , and 𝑘 -𝐷 planes, suggesting differences in the 

energetic state of the reconstructed turbulent flow. 

Experiment 1 shows closer agreement with the reference results than Experiment 2, whereas Experiment 

2 exhibits larger deviations, particularly in the TKE production and dissipation terms. These results 

suggest that although the proposed approach can repro duce major flow structures, accurately preserving 

the energy transfer process across turbulent scales remains challenging. 

For the time variation of TKE corresponding to other shapes, see Figure G.1 in Appendix G. 

Figure 13. Comparison of phase space trajectories for different experimental setups. The phase 

space is defined by the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE, ∫ 𝑘 ; 𝑑𝑉 ), TKE production ( ∫ 𝑃 ; 𝑑𝑉 ), and 

TKE dissipation ( ∫ 𝐷 ; 𝑑𝑉 ). From left to right, the panels display a 3D perspective view followed by 

2D projections onto the 𝑃 -𝑘 , 𝑃 -𝐷 , and 𝑘 -𝐷 planes. Distinct clusters for Ref. (blue), Exp. 1 (orange), 

and Exp. 2 (green) illustrate the shifts in the system's energetic state under each condition. 

Figure 1 4 illustrates the temporal correlation coefficient for PC1= 0.0. The temporal correlation 

coefficient is formulated as follows: 

𝑅 (Δ𝑡 ) = ⟨𝑢 <(𝑡 )𝑢 <(𝑡 + Δ𝑡 )⟩

⟨𝑢 <(𝑡 )!⟩ , (14 )

where 𝑅 represents the temporal correlation coefficient, ⟨⋯ ⟩ denotes the spatial average , 𝑢 < is the 

fluctuation component of the streamwise velocity, 𝑡 denotes the initial time, and Δ𝑡 is the time interval 

from the initial state. 

Regarding the time variation of the temporal correlation coefficient, the results of Experiment 1 are 

closer to the high -precision simulation results than those of Experiment 2. In particular, Experiment 1 

reproduces the initial decay behavior of the tempo ral correlation more accurately, indicating better 

agreement in the characteristic time scale of the turbulent fluctuations. 

However, both Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 retain larger correlation values than the reference results 

at later times, suggesting that temporal decorrelation occurs more slowly in the reconstructed flow fields. 

This indicates that the generated flow field s contain more persistent structures and do not fully reproduce 

the temporal evolution of turbulent fluctuations. 18 

These results suggest that Experiment 1 more accurately captures the temporal characteristics of the 

turbulent wake, although reproducing the complete temporal dynamics of turbulence remains 

challenging. 

For the correlation coefficients corresponding to other shapes, see Figure H.1 in Appendix H. 

Figure 14. Temporal autocorrelation coefficient 𝑅 (∆𝑡 )

of velocity fluctuations for PC1= 0.0. The plot compares 

the decay of temporal correlation over a time interval ∆𝑡 

[s] for the Ref. (blue), Exp. 1 (orange), and Exp. 2 

(green). 

3.4. Computational Speed -Up via Model Reduction 

The computational speed -up achieved by the proposed model reduction method during simulation is 

presented. As shown in Table 3, the proposed method requires up to 133 hours of computation for 

training. However, once the training is completed, the reduced -order simulation for arbitrary geometries 

only requires the time evolution of 32 variables to be computed. The computational cost for this is 

1.43×10 -3 seconds per time step (corresponding to an integration time of 2.5×10 -5 seconds) using a single 

CPU. 

In contrast, the high -precision simulation requires 385 CPUs, with a computational time of 5.69 seconds 

per time step. This corresponds to a performance improvement of approximately 3,979 times in terms 

of computational time. 

4. Summary and conclusions 

In this study, we applied a new variational autoencoder (VAE) mechanism to our distributed parallel 

training -based model reduction framework for high -precision flow field data, developed in our previous 

work. We focused on the region near the rear end of t he vehicle body to evaluate its robustness in 

handling high -Reynolds -number flows around unknown vehicle shapes. 19 

Specifically, we designed two experiments, where the flow fields around either five or two vehicle 

shapes were used for training. We then evaluated whether vortex generation at various spatial and 

temporal scales could be reconstructed from 32 latent varia bles for flow fields around shapes not 

included in training. In the largest experiment, training was conducted for 26 hours using 8,118 nodes 

on Fugaku. 

As a result, both experiments demonstrated high accuracy in reproducing large -scale vortices in space 

and time . However, a clear trade -off between generalization capability and the accuracy of local flow 

structures was observed . Experiment 1, trained on a larger number of geometries, successfully captured 

more generalized flow behavior . It exhibited superior physical consistency, demonstrated by more 

spatially continuous velocity fields , better adherence to mass conservation (lower velocity divergence) ,

and closer agreement with reference high -precision simulations in the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) 

phase space . Furthermore, Experiment 1 more accurately preserved the initial temporal correlation 

decay and the high -frequency components of the energy spectrum .

In contrast, Experiment 2, trained on fewer geometries, tended to specialize in specific flow patterns. 

While this allowed for a sharper representation of strong, localized vortical structures, particularly in 

the z -direction ( 𝜔 :) , it also resulted in pronounced spatial discontinuities and an overrepresentation of 

fine -scale, physically inconsistent fluctuations. 

Notably, the proposed model reduction method achieved significant computational efficiency. Once the 

network is trained, the reduced -order simulation for arbitrary geometries requires computing the time 

evolution of only 32 variables, taking just 1.43×10 -3 seconds per time step on a single CPU. This 

represents a computational speed -up of approximately 3,979 times compared to the high -precision 

simulation requiring 385 CPUs. 

For future work, we aim to enhance the network architecture to further improve the accuracy of small -

scale vortex reconstruction and optimize hyperparameters, including determining the appropriate 

number of decomposition modes based on vortex scale. 

Acknowledgments 

This research is an extension of the method originally proposed by Mr. Takaaki Murata, Dr. Kai Fukami, 

and Professor Koji Fukagata of Keio University. We sincerely appreciate their valuable contributions, 

which laid the foundation for this study, as well a s their insightful advice throughout the research. 

We also extend our gratitude to Professor Takuji Nakashima from Hiroshima University for providing 

high -quality vehicle body models and for engaging in fruitful discussions. 

The computational resources of “Fugaku” were provided through the HPCI System Research Project 

(Project ID: hp240205 and ra240008). 

Appendices 

Appendix A

The detailed network architectures for the encoder and decoder are presented in Tables A.1 and A.2 

Table A.1 . Layer -wise details of the encoder network architecture. 

Layer type Output shape (X, Y, Z, channel) 

Input layer (384, 288 , 192 , 3) 20 

1st 3D convolution al layer (384, 288 , 192 , 4)

Layer normalization (384, 288 , 192 , 4)

3D max pooling layer (192, 144 , 96 , 4)

2nd 3D convolution al layer (192, 144 , 96 , 2)

Layer normalization 

3D max pooling layer (96, 72 , 48 , 2)

3rd 3D convolution al layer (96, 72 , 48 , 2)

Layer normalization (96, 72 , 48 , 2)

3D max pooling layer (48, 36, 24 , 2)

4th 3D convolution al layer (48, 36 , 24 , 1) 

Layer normalization (48, 36 , 24 , 1) 

3D max pooling layer (24, 1 8, 24 , 1)

5th 3D convolution al layer (24, 1 8, 24 , 3)

Layer normalization (24, 1 8, 24 , 3)

3D max pooling layer (12, 9, 24 , 3)

6th 3D convolution al layer (12, 9, 24 , 3)

Layer normalization (12, 9, 24 , 3)

3D max pooling layer (6, 4, 24 , 3)

7th Fully connected layer (32 , 1, 1, 1) 

Layer normalization (latent vector output) (32 , 1, 1, 1) 

Table A.2 . Layer -wise details of the decoder network architecture .

Layer type Output shape (X, Y, Z, channel) 

Initial input (single element of the latent vector) (1, 1, 1, 1) 

1st Fully connected layer (6, 4, 24 , 3)

Layer normalization (6, 4, 24 , 3)

2nd 3D interpolation layer (12, 9, 24 , 3)

3D convolution al layer (12, 9, 24 , 3)

Layer normalization (12, 9, 24 , 3)

3rd 3D interpolation layer (24, 18 , 24 , 3)

3D convolution al layer (24, 1 8, 24 , 1)

Layer normalization (24, 1 8, 24 , 1)

4th 3D interpolation layer (48, 36 , 24 , 1)

3D convolution al layer (48, 36 , 24 , 2)

Layer normalization (48, 36 , 24 , 2)

5th 3D interpolation layer (96, 72 , 48 , 2)

3D convolution al layer (96, 72 , 48 , 2)

Layer normalization (96, 72 , 48 , 2)

6th 3D interpolation layer (192, 144 , 96 , 2)21 

3D convolution al layer (192, 144 , 96 , 2)

Layer normalization (192, 144 , 96 , 2)

7th 3D interpolation layer (384, 288 , 192 , 2)

3D convolution al layer (384, 288 , 192 , 3) 

Layer normalization (decomposed flow field) (384, 288 , 192 , 3) 

The hyperparameters used in this study are presented in Table A.3. 

Table A.3. Hyperparameter settings .

Filter size (convolutional layers) 3 × 3 × 3

Pooling size (max pooling layers) 2 × 2 × 2

Weight initialization method Xavier uniform 

Optimization algorithm Adam 

Initial learning rate 0.001 

Batch size per iteration 492 

Activation function tanh 

Appendix B

The time -variation of elements of latent vector are shown in Figure B.1. 22 

Figure B.1 . Time variation of all latent vector elements for PC1= 0.0 .

Here, snapshots of the fluctuating components of the decomposed streamwise flow field around 

PC1= 0.0 for each mode are presented. Figures B.2 and B.3 correspond to Experiment 1 and Experiment 

2, respectively. 23 

Figure B.2 . Snapshot of the fluctuating components of the streamwise flow velocity 𝑢 for 

each mode (Exp. 1). 24 

Figure B.3 . Snapshot of the fluctuating components of the streamwise flow velocity 𝑢 for 

each mode (Exp. 2). 25 

Appendix C

Figure C.1 –C.4 presents a snapshot of the reconstructed flow fields from 32 latent variables for all 

vehicle geometries. 

Figure C.1 Snapshot of the reconstructed flow fields from 32 latent variables for PC1= -1.2 .

Figure C.2 Snapshot of the reconstructed flow fields from 32 latent variables for PC1= -0.6 .        

> XY
> Z
> !
> XY
> Z
> !
> XY
> Z
> "
> XY
> Z
> !!
> XY
> Z
> !
> XY
> Z
> !
> XY
> Z
> "
> XY
> Z
> !!

26 

Figure C.3 Snapshot of the reconstructed flow fields from 32 latent variables for PC1= 0.6 .

Figure C.4 Snapshot of the reconstructed flow fields from 32 latent variables for PC1= 1.2 .        

> XY
> Z
> !
> XY
> Z
> !
> XY
> Z
> "
> XY
> Z
> !!
> XY
> Z
> !
> XY
> Z
> !
> XY
> Z
> "
> XY
> Z
> !!

27 

Appendix D

Figure D.1 presents a snapshot of the isosurface of the Q -criterion (the second invariant of the velocity 

gradient tensor). 

Figure D.1 . Instantaneous Q -criterion isosurface colored by velocity magnitude for PC1= -1.2 .

Figure D.2 . Instantaneous Q -criterion isosurface colored by velocity magnitude for PC1= -0.6 .

Figure D.3 . Instantaneous Q -criterion isosurface colored by velocity magnitude for PC1= 0.6 .28 

Figure D.4 . Instantaneous Q -criterion isosurface colored by velocity magnitude for PC1= 1.2 .

Appendix E

Figure E.1 presents the energy spectrum of the flow field for all vehicle shape patterns. 

Figure E.1 . Energy spectra of the flow fields for all vehicle shape variations. 29 

Appendix F

Figure F.1 presents the probability density function of vorticity for the flow field of all vehicle shape 

patterns. 

Figure F.1. Probability density function of vorticity for the flow fields around all vehicle shape 

patterns.  

> XY
> Z

!! 

> XY
> Z

## !!30 

Appendix G

Figure G.1 presents the time variation of turbulent kinetic energy for the flow field of all vehicle shape 

patterns. 

Figure G.1. Phase space trajectory of the physical system, defined by turbulent kinetic energy 

(TKE), TKE production, and TKE dissipation, for all vehicle shape variations. 31 

Appendix H

Figure H.1 presents the correlation coefficient of the flow field for all vehicle shape patterns. 

Figure H.1. Temporal correlation coefficient for all vehicle shape variations .

References 

[1] C. Kato, Y. Yamade, K. Nagano, K. Kumahata, K. Minami, T. Nishikawa, ‘Toward Realization of Numerical Towing -Tank 

Tests by Wall -Resolved Large Eddy Simulation based on 32 Billion Grid Finite -Element Computation’, in: SC20: International 

Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, 2020, pp. 23 –35. 

[2] T. Yoshida, ‘Fujitsu High Performance CPU for the Post -K Computer’, in: Hot Chips, 2018. [Online]. Available: 

https://www.fujitsu.com/global/documents/solutions/business -technology/tc/catalog/20180821hotchips30.pdf. 

[3] R -CCS, ‘About Fugaku’, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.r -ccs.riken.jp/en/fugaku/about/ (Accessed 12 September 

2023). 

[4] N. Jansson, M. Karp, A. Perez, T. Mukha, Y. Ju, J. Liu, S. Páll, E. Laure, T. Weinkauf, J. Schumacher, P. Schlatter, S. 

Markidis, ‘Exploring the Ultimate Regime of Turbulent Rayleigh –Bénard Convection Through Unprecedented Spectral -

Element Simulations’ , in: Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage 

and Analysis, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023, pp. 1 –9. 

[5] LUMI consortium, ‘LUMI’s Full System Architecture Revealed’, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.lumi -

supercomputer.eu/lumis -full -system -architecture -revealed/ (Accessed 14 February 2025). 

[6] K.L. Vasudev, R. Sharma, S.K. Bhattacharyya, ‘A multi -objective optimization design framework integrated with CFD for 

the design of AUVs’, Meth. Oceanogr. 10 (2014) 138 –165. 

[7] N. Kasagi, Y. Suzuki, K. Fukagata, Microelectromechanical systems –based feedback control of turbulence for skin friction 

reduction, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 41 (2009) 231 –251. 

[8] J.L. Lumley, ‘The Structure of Inhomogeneous Turbulent Flows’, in: Atmospheric Turbulence and Radio Wave Propagation, 

A.M. Yaglom, V.I. Tatarski (Eds.), Nauka, 1967. 

[9] G. Berkooz, P. Holmes, and J. L. Lumley, "The proper orthogonal decomposition in the analysis of turbulent flows," Annual 

Review of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 539 -575, 1993. 

[10] L. Sirovich, "Turbulence and the dynamics of coherent structures. Part I: Coherent structures," Quarterly of Applied 

Mathematics, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 561 -571, 1987. 

[11] B. R. Noack, K. Afanasiev, M. Morzynski, G. Tadmor, and F. Thiele, "A hierarchy of low -dimensional models for the 

transient and post -transient cylinder wake," Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 497, pp. 335 -363, 2003. 

[12] K. Taira et al., "Modal analysis of fluid flows: An overview," AIAA Journal, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 4013 -4041, 2017. 

[13] S. L. Brunton, B. R. Noack, and P. Koumoutsakos, "Machine learning for fluid mechanics," Annual Review of Fluid 

Mechanics, vol. 52, pp. 477 -508, 2020. 32 

[14 ] T. Murata, K. Fukami, K. Fukagata, ‘Nonlinear mode decomposition with convolutional neural networks for fluid 

dynamics’, J. Fluid Mech. 882 (2020) A13. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2019.822 

[1 5] K. Ando, K. Onishi, R. Bale, A. Kuroda, M. Tsubokura, ‘Nonlinear reduced -order modeling for three -dimensional 

turbulent flow by large -scale machine learning’, Comput. Fluids 266 (2023) 106047. 

[1 6] S. Hochreiter, J. Schmidhuber, ‘Long Short -Term Memory’, Neural Comput. 9 (1997) 1735 –1780. 

[1 7] B. Koo, H. Kim, T. Jo, S. Kim, J.Y. Yoon, ‘Proper orthogonal decomposition –Galerkin projection method for quasi -two -

dimensional laminar hydraulic transient flow’, J. Hydraul. Res. 59 (2021) 224 –234. 

[1 8] P. Benner, S. Gugercin, K. Willcox, ‘A Survey of Projection -Based Model Reduction Methods for Parametric Dynamical 

Systems’, SIAM Rev. 57 (2015) 483 –531. 

[1 9] J. Tran, K. Fukami, K. Inada, D. Umehara, Y. Ono, K. Ogawa, K. Taira, Aerodynamics -guided machine learning for 

design optimization of electric vehicles, Commun Eng 3 (2024) 174. 

[20 ] K. Hasegawa, K. Fukami, T. Murata, K. Fukagata, ‘Machine -learning -based reduced -order modeling for unsteady flows 

around bluff bodies of various shapes’, Theor. Comput. Fluid Dyn. 34 (2020) 367 –383. 

[21 ] K. Hasegawa, K. Fukami, T. Murata, K. Fukagata, ‘CNN -LSTM based reduced order modeling of two -dimensional 

unsteady flows around a circular cylinder at different Reynolds numbers’, Fluid Dyn. Res. 52 (2020) 065501. 

[22 ] A. Higashida, K. Ando, M. Rüttgers, A. Lintermann, M. Tsubokura, ‘Robustness evaluation of large -scale machine 

learning -based reduced order models for reproducing flow fields’, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 159 (2024) 243 –254. 

[23 ] K. Ando, K. Onishi, R. Bale, A. Kuroda, M. Tsubokura, ‘ Evaluation of applicability of nonlinear reduced -order model 

using neural network ’, JSFM Annual Meeting 2022 , 27 -29 September, 2022, Kyoto, Japan (2022 ). (Japanese only) 

[24 ] N. Jansson, R. Bale, K. Onishi, M. Tsubokura, ‘CUBE: A scalable framework for large -scale industrial simulations’, Int. 

J. High Perform. Comput. Appl. 33 (2019) 678 –698. 

[25 ] K. Nakahashi, ‘Building -Cube method for flow problems with broadband characteristic length’, in: Computational Fluid 

Dynamics 2002, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 77 –81. 

[26] K. Onishi, M. Tsubokura, ‘Topology -free immersed boundary method for incompressible turbulence flows: An 

aerodynamic simulation for “dirty” CAD geometry’, Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 378 (2021) 113734. 

[2 7] C.S. Peskin, ‘The immersed boundary method’, Acta Numer. 11 (2002) 479 –517. 

[2 8] A.P.S. Bhalla, R. Bale, B.E. Griffith, N.A. Patankar, ‘A unified mathematical framework and an adaptive numerical 

method for fluid -structure interaction with rigid, deforming, and elastic bodies’, J. Comput. Phys. 250 (2013) 446 –476. 

[29] Grinstein, Fernando F., Len G. Margolin, and William J. Rider, eds. Implicit large eddy simulation. Vol. 10. Cambridge: 

Cambridge university press, 2007. 

[30] M. Rüttgers, J. Park, D. You, ‘Large -eddy simulation of turbulent flow over the DrivAer fastback vehicle model’, J. Wind 

Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 186 (2019) 123 –138. 

[31 ] Program for Promoting Researches on the Supercomputer Fugaku, “Smart Design Realized on the Supercomputer 

"Fugaku" in the Society 5.0 Era,” 2022 . (in J apanese) 

[32] NVIDIA, ‘NVIDIA H100 Tensor Core GPU Datasheet’, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://resources.nvidia.com/en -us -

tensor -core/nvidia -tensor -core -gpu -datasheet (Accessed 27 February 2025).