Title: 2605.29887v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.29887v1

Published Time: Fri, 29 May 2026 01:17:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 79

Markdown Content:
1

# Revisit the simplified lattice Boltzmann method: dissipation, dispersion and stability 

Zhengwei He a,b , Zhen Chen a,b,†  

> a

Marine Numerical Experiment Center, State Key Laboratory of Ocean Engineering, Shanghai 200240, China b School of Naval Architecture, Ocean and Civil Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China 

## Abstract 

The simplified lattice Boltzmann method (SLBM) is a recent development in the lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) community, addressing the intrinsic limitations of the traditional LBM by directly evolving macroscopic quantities and maintaining numerical stability in high-Reynolds-number simulations. However, fundamental understanding of the numerical dissipation and dispersion of SLBM is still lacking, and the origin of its good numerical stability remains unknown. In this work, a generalized formulation is developed, revealing that the SLBM recovers modified macroscopic equations containing both intrinsic physical deviations and numerical truncation errors. To remove these deviations, the macroscopic equation derived from the standard BGK-LBM is adopted as a reference model and solved by the predictor–corrector strategy, which constitutes the reformulated SLBM. The proposed method uses the generalized SLBM formulation in the predictor step with tunable high-order parameters, while the corrector step is realized by the finite-difference discretization. Linear wave analysis clarifies the roles of these parameters in † Correspondence author. Email address: zhen.chen@sjtu.edu.cn (Z. Chen) 2controlling numerical dissipation and dispersion, which is then validated in more complicated numerical examples. It is demonstrated that the reformulated SLBM preserves the second-order accuracy, improves the dispersion–dissipation performance, enhances numerical stability, and resolves fine vortex structures on relatively coarse grids. Thus, the proposed method combines improved numerical properties with the simplicity of SLBM, offering a high-fidelity and stable scheme for incompressible flow simulations. 

Key words: Simplified lattice Boltzmann method; dissipation; dispersion; numerical stability. 

## 1 Introduction 

The lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) [1–3] is a mesoscopic numerical approach for simulating flow problems [4–8]. Over decades of development, the numerical characteristics of LBM have been well recognized, and its popularity in the computational mechanics community has been growing due to its kinetic nature, simplicity, and explicitness. However, intrinsic limitations such as high cost of virtual memory and inconvenient implementation of physical boundary conditions remain. In addition, the standard single-relaxation-time (SRT) LBM can be unstable at low lattice viscosity, which can be alleviated by the multiple-relaxation-time (MRT) schemes [9], the entropic LBM (ELBM) [10] and others. The simplified lattice Boltzmann method (SLBM) [11] was proposed as a robust alternative to resolve the aforementioned limitations of the standard LBM. Unlike the standard LBM, SLBM directly evolves macroscopic quantities using the predictor-corrector strategy, which circumvents the storage of distribution functions, reduces the memory consumption and improves numerical stability [12,13]. Customized solvers were then devised in the SLBM framework to tackle multiple 3types of flow problems including thermal flows [14,15], multiphase flows [16], phase-change modeling [17], and non-Newtonian fluids [18]. In the meantime, to accommodate complex geometries, SLBM has been integrated with non-uniform grids [19] and immersed boundary methods [20]. Furthermore, owing to its numerical stability and memory-efficient structure, SLBM has been extended to a broad range of physical problems. Representative applications include magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) [21], ferrofluid droplet deformation [22], nanofluid convection [23], and GPU-accelerated implementations [24]. Over the past decade, algorithmic developments of the SLBM have followed two complementary directions: incorporating additional physics and refining the time-marching procedure to improve efficiency. On the physical side, Dai et al. [25] introduced an enthalpy-based version (SELBM) with an entropy-based source term for phase-change simulations [26], while Gao et al. [27] reformulated the equilibrium distribution to achieve a strictly incompressible formulation (IC-SHSLBM). Concurrently, efforts to streamline time integration have produced a family of single-step methods, including the SS-SLBM for turbulence proposed by Delgado-Gutiérrez et al. [28] and its extension to 3D MHD [29], as well as the one-step methos (OSLBM) proposed by Qin et al. [30,31] and its improved version NOSLBM for large-density-ratio multiphase flows [32]. Despite its well-documented numerical stability presented by the above works and Ref. [12,13,33], numerical intuition suggests that the improved stability could come at the cost of extra dissipation. Some practices have confirmed this, and techniques like local mesh refinement [34,35] or high-order interpolation (HSLBM [36]) are required to recover delicate flow structures on comparable mesh sizes. Several attempts have been made to restore this trade-off. Chen et al. [37] reduced numerical dissipation by reformulating the predictor step, though at the expense of 4stability. Gao et al. [38] proposed a consistent forcing scheme, in which the predictor-corrector equations are reconstructed based on the GZS forcing model in LBM [39]. This enables SLBM to interpret external forcing effects with better accuracy, especially in the circumstances with non-uniform forcing fields. They further introduced an additional correction step [40] (CSLBM) to enhance accuracy. In the context of multiphase flow simulations, Li et al. [41] modified the phase-field solver by solving the Allen–Cahn equation instead of the Cahn–Hilliard equation in Ref. [16], which improves the interfacial sharpness. While these approaches differ in implementation, one important insight emerges: numerical performance of the SLBM are fundamentally associated with the macroscopic equations it reconstructs. This viewpoint was further supported by Lu et al. [42], who showed that the SLBM essentially reconstructs solutions to the macroscopic equations with additional terms responsible for its strong numerical stability. These investigations suggest that improving SLBM accuracy without extra mesh refinement or high-order techniques requires a deeper understanding of the SLBM’s equivalent macroscopic equations and their numerical implications. In this paper, we present a generalized formulation that enables a more comprehensive theoretical analysis of the SLBM by recasting it as a specific reconstruction of the macroscopic equations. Using macroscopic equations derived from the BGK-LBM [43] as a reference baseline, we show that the SLBM solves the equations containing both intrinsic physical deviations and numerical truncation errors. Motivated by this finding, we replace the macroscopic equations reconstructed by the original SLBM with the physically consistent reference model and propose a new predictor–corrector scheme. The predictor step is reconstructed from equilibrium moments via the generalized SLBM, while the corrector step employs the finite-difference discretization. The equilibrium-based reconstruction introduces tunable parameters associated with high-order 5derivatives in the macroscopic equations, allowing flexible adjustments of numerical dissipation, dispersion, and stability. Systematic linear wave analysis and numerical benchmarks demonstrate the advantages of the present method over the original SLBM and validate the dissipation inherent in the original SLBM. In general, the proposed method establishes an algorithmic protocol that allows constructing well-balanced schemes in the SLBM framework, with which low memory cost, convenient boundary treatment and good numerical stability are maintained, and the numerical dissipation is largely reduced. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the principles of the SLBM with theoretical analysis and derives the proposed method with mathematical details. Section 3 presents a carefully designed linear wave analysis to offer a semi-quantitative understanding of the numerical dissipation and dispersion characteristics of both the original SLBM and the proposed method. Section 4 validates the linear wave analysis through numerical benchmarks and demonstrates the performance of the new method. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5. 

## 2 Methodology 2.1 Revisit of the simplified lattice Boltzmann method 

2.1.1 The simplified lattice Boltzmann method (SLBM) 

The SLBM reformulates the conventional lattice Boltzmann method by directly evolving macroscopic variables through a predictor–corrector scheme, where only equilibrium distribution functions are involved. This formulation preserves the locality and simplicity of lattice-based schemes while significantly reducing memory requirements. For isothermal flow simulations, the formulations of SLBM can be written as follows: 

Predictor :6

ߩ ∗ ݂෍ = ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜(1ܽ ) 

࢛ߩ( ) ∗ = ෍ ࢋ ௜ ݂∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜(1ܾ ) 

Corrector :

ߩ = ߩ ∗ (2ܽ ) 

࢛ߩ ࢛ߩ( = ) ∗ ߬( + − 1) ൥෍ ࢋ ௜ ݂∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ + ௜ )ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜࢛)ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݎ(ߩ − ൩)ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݎ( (2ܾ ) 

where ࢘  and t denote the space location and time level, respectively; ߩ and ࢛  represent the density and the velocity vector, respectively; δt is the streaming time step; ߬  denotes the relaxation parameter in LBGK model, which is related to the kinematic viscosity ߭  by ߭ ܿ= ௦ଶ ߬( − 0.5)ݐߜ (3) 

In this article, the D2Q9 model is employed with the equilibrium function in the form of, ݂ ௜௘௤ (ݐ , ࢘) = ݓ ௜ ߩ ቆ1 + ࢋ ௜ ࢛ܿ∙ ௦ଶ + ࢋ( ௜ ࢛∙ ) ଶܿ2 ௦ସ ࢛− ଶܿ2 ௦ଶ ቇ (4) 

where ݓ௜ and ܿ  ௦ denote the lattice weight and the sound speed, respectively: 

ݓ௜ =⎩⎪⎨⎪⎧ 19 ݅, = 0 49 ݅, = 1, 2, 3, 4 136 ݅, = 5, 6, 7, 8 (5ܽ ) ܿ ௦ = 1√3 ݔߜ ݐߜ (5ܾ ) 

And the lattice velocity vectors in the D2Q9 model can be expressed as 

ࢋ ௜ = ቐ (0, 0)݅ ܿ0 = (±1, 0),ܿ (0, ±1)݅ = 1, 2, 3, 4ܿ (±1, ±1)݅ = 5, 6, 7, 8 (6) 

with ܿ  ݐߜ/ݔߜ = , ݔߜ and ݐߜ being the streaming distance and the time step, respectively. 7In summary, SLBM evolves the macroscopic variables through a predictor–corrector scheme in which both steps are constructed using equilibrium distribution functions within the lattice Boltzmann framework. This formulation preserves the simplicity of lattice-based schemes and provides a concise and memory-efficient numerical procedure, which serves as the baseline for the method developed in the following subsections. 

2.1.2 The generalized SLBM formulation and theoretical analysis 

While the original SLBM formulations reviewed in Section 2.1.1 offer notable advantages in terms of algorithmic simplicity and memory efficiency, deeper theoretical understanding is required to clarify the origin of its numerical performance. In particular, although the SLBM has demonstrated favorable numerical robustness in practice, its underlying macroscopic consistency and truncation-error structure remain insufficiently understood. To address this issue in a systematic manner, we extend the SLBM to a more generalized formulation and perform a detailed theoretical analysis. The starting point of this analysis is the reconstruction method inherent to the SLBM, namely that macroscopic evolution equations are implicitly synthesized through moments of equilibrium distribution functions. By abstracting away from the specific coefficient choices and mesh node stencil of the original SLBM, this idea leads to the generalized SLBM, in which a broad class of numerical schemes can be expressed within the predictor–corrector structure. In the following, we focus on the momentum equation for clarity. In the generalized form, the macroscopic momentum evolution can be written as 

ݑߩ( ఈ )GSLBM ݃= )ݐ ,ܚ( ௠,ఈ ܯ − ݃  ௠,ఈ ∗ , (7) 

where ݃  ௠,ఈ and ݃  ௠,ఈ ∗ denote generalized predictor and corrector operators, respectively. Both operators are constructed as linear combinations of equilibrium distribution functions with free 8coefficients. The explicit forms of these operators, together with the coefficient definitions, are provided in Appendix A. Following the comments of Lu et al. [43], this predictor-corrector structure can approximate the time partial derivative ߲  ௧ , allowing the reconstruction of the macroscopic governing equations. Importantly, the free coefficients embedded in the generalized formulation facilitates controlling both the recovered macroscopic equation and the associated truncation-error terms. As a result, the generalized SLBM is not just as a numerical formulation. It can be viewed as an analytical tool to examine the consistency with the macroscopic equations and evaluate the limitations of equilibrium-based reconstruction strategies. By substituting the specific coefficients inherent to the original SLBM (as summarized in Section 2.1.1) into this generalized formulation, one can employ the Taylor series expansion and the equilibrium moment relationships to reveal the macroscopic equations that the original SLBM actually solves: ߲ ௧ ݑߩ( ఈ ) = −߲ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ߥܿ௘௙௙ ௦߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ + ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ ߲൰ݐߜ− 0.5 ߲௧ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙߲ ௧∗ + ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ൬ 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ + 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ൰+ ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ ቆ ݐߜ ൰ݐߜ− 0.5 16 ߲( ଷ,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ) − 16 ߲( ଷ )ቇ ܱ+ ݐߜ( ௠ ߲, ௟ ݉| ≥ 2,݈ ≥ 3) + ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙ܱ ݐߜ( ௠ ߲, ௟ ߲, ௟,∗ ݉| ≥ 2,݈ ≥ 4) ∗߲− = ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ + ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ ߲൰ݐߜ− 0.5 ߲௧ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ߥ௩௜௥௧௨௔௟ܿ ௦߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ + ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙߲ ௧∗+ ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ൬ 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ + 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ൰+ ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ ቆ ݐߜ ൰ݐߜ− 0.5 16 ߲( ଷ,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ) − 16 ߲( ଷ )ቇ ܱ+ ݐߜ( ௠ ߲, ௟ ݉| ≥ 2,݈ ≥ 3) + ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙ܱ ݐߜ( ௠ ߲, ௟ ߲, ௟,∗ ݉| ≥ 2,݈ ≥ 4) ∗(8) 9where the subscript * denotes the quantities related to intermediate values in the predictor step. The detailed derivations are given in Appendix A and B. When the resulting equation is compared with the physically consistent equation derived from the BGK-LBE [43] (the more actual macroscopic equation, MAME), two fundamental discrepancies are revealed. The first discrepancy affects the physical consistency in the predictor step. The analysis shows that the effective viscosity recovered by the SLBM, denoted by ୣߥ ୤୤ , does not coincide with the physical viscosity ߥ୮୦୷ . This deviation can be interpreted as a virtual viscosity effect. The ୣߥ ୤୤ 

can be decomposed as 

ୣߥ ୤୤ ߥ = ୴୧୰୲୳ୟ୪ ߥ + ୮୦୷ (9ܽ ) 

where ߥ୮୦୷ represents the actual physical viscosity and 

ߥ୴୧୰୲୳ୟ୪ ܿ= ௦ଶ (1 −߬ ) ݐߜ (9ܾ ) 

represents the virtual viscosity implicitly introduced by the parameters selected in the predictor step of the original SLBM. This additional term indicates that the SLBM effectively solves a modified macroscopic equation that deviates from the physically consistent equation. The sign of the virtual viscosity provides solid theoretical explanations to the numerical behaviors of the SLBM. When ߬  < 1 , ߥ୴୧୰୲୳ୟ୪ is positive, corresponding to an artificial increase in dissipation in the predictor step. This excessive dissipation stabilizes the numerical scheme and explains the exceptional stability of the SLBM at low relaxation time. Conversely, when ߬  > 1 ,the virtual viscosity becomes negative, potentially risking the numerical stability. These theoretical analyses are consistent with the reported numerical observations and linear stability analyses [33]. Another physical inconsistency term is 

ܿ߭൬ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙߲ ௧∗ . (10) 10 This term is generated by the difference between the usual predictor step of MAME and those of the SLBM. Notably, these two deviations reflect physical inconsistency with the macroscopic equations rather than the numerical discretization error. Beyond the physical deviations discussed above, the recovered momentum equation also contains numerical error terms inherent to the generalized SLBM formulation. In the predictor step, the original SLBM yields nonzero coefficients for higher-order truncation terms, denoted as ݐଷ

and ݐସ in the Appendix A, which correspond to the third-order and the fourth-order spatial derivatives. In contrast, additional numerical errors originate from the corrector step. Owing to the equilibrium-based predictor–corrector structure, the resulting momentum equation contains an ܱ (1) term associated with the second-order spatial derivatives and an ܱ  )ݐߜ( term involving the third-order derivatives, reflecting intrinsic structural limitations of the formulation. It is therefore inappropriate to attribute the numerical behavior of the SLBM solely to the presence of the virtual viscosity. Although the physical deviations term does not disappear with grid refinement, the ܱ  (1) numerical error in the corrector step can offset it to some extent and resulting in a ܱ  )ݐߜ( term (see Appendix B1 for derivation): 

12 ∂ఉ ∂ ఊ ቀΠ ఈఉఊୣ ୯ −Π ఈఉఊ (ୣ୯ ,∗) ݐߜ ∝ ቁ (11) 

This explains the capability of the original SLBM to give correct flow simulation results even with physical inconsistent term. It is worth noting that Ref. [42] also analyzed the numerical behavior of the SLBM and attributed its dissipation primarily to numerical discretization effects. The present analysis differs from it in a way that it does not rely on the approximation 

ߔ ∗ ≈ ߲+ ߔ ߲ߔ ݐ ܱ+ ݐߜ ݐߜ( ଶ ), 11 but instead, strictly follows the Taylor expansion combined with the predictor–corrector structure. This distinction allows the virtual viscosity to be explicitly identified and separated from conventional numerical errors. Finally, a particularly illuminating situation arises in the special case of ߬  = 1 . In this condition, both the virtual viscosity and the leading low-order truncation errors vanish, and the predictor–corrector formulations degenerate to a single-step update with second-order accuracy. Consequently, the original SLBM converges to the MAME at this order and becomes formally identical to the standard BGK-LBM, which elucidates the theoretical connections among the SLBM (and the SS-SLBM), the MAME, and the BGK-LBM (see Appendix B). In summary, the numerical stability, dissipation, dispersion, and accuracy of the SLBM are jointly determined by both the physical deviation terms and the numerical error terms identified in the above analyses. In particular, the apparent second-order accuracy often observed in practice could be the result of a consequence that these error terms tend to be small, rather than the strict second-order consistency with the desired macroscopic equations. 

2.2 Reformulated simplified lattice Boltzmann method (RSLBM) 

As discussed in Section 2.1, the simplified lattice Boltzmann method is shown to recover the macroscopic equations that deviate from the physically consistent ones. This observation implies that the employment of physically consistent macroscopic equations would benefit constructing improved numerical schemes, which constitutes the motivation of the reformulated simplified lattice Boltzmann method proposed in this work. The more actual macroscopic equations (MAME), as shown in Eq. 12, provides such a physically consistent description by remaining directly rooted 12 in the BGK lattice Boltzmann equation. In the present work, the MAME are adopted as the physically consistent target equations. ߲ ௧  ≈ ߩ )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘(ߩ − )ݐ , ࢘(ߩ ݐߜ ߲− = ఈ ݑߩ( ఈ ߲ݐߜ0.5 + ) ߲ఈ ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ (12ܽ ) ߲ ௧ ݑߩ( ఈ ) ≈ ݑߩ( ఈ )( )ݐ , ࢘− (ݑߩ ఈ )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘() ݐߜ ߲− = ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ߭+ ൯ ߲൫ ఉ ݑߩ( ఈ ) + 2߲ ఊ ݑߩ൫ ఊ ߜ൯ ఈఉ ൯ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ ߲൰ݐߜ− 0.5 ߲௧ ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯(12ܾ ) 

To facilitate time marching, the predictor–corrector approximation of the temporal derivative is adopted. For convenience, this formulation is referred as the semi-discrete MAME (Eq. 13 and 14): 

Predictor: 

ߩ ∗ ߩ = ௧ି ఋ௧ ߲ݐߜ − ఈ ݑߩ( ఈ )௧ି ఋ௧ + 0.5ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఈ ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ ௧ି ఋ௧ (13ܽ ) 

ݑߩ( ఈ )∗ ݑߩ( = ఈ )௧ି ఋ௧ ߲ݐߜ − ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ ௧ି ఋ௧ ߲൫ ݐߜ ߭+ ఉ ݑߩ( ఈ ) + 2߲ ఊ ݑߩ൫ ఊ ߜ൯ ఈఉ ൯ ௧ି ఋ௧ (13ܾ ) 

Corrector: 

ߩ = )ݐ , ࢘(ߩ ∗ (14ܽ ) 

ݑߩ( ఈ )(ݑߩ( = )ݐ , ࢘ ఈ ) ∗ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ቂ߲ ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ ∗ ߲− ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ ௧ି ఋ௧ ቃ (14ܾ ) 

which can be rewritten into a more concise form: 

ߩெ஺ொ (ݐ , ࢘) = ߩ ௧ି ఋ௧ ߲ݐߜ − ఈ ݑߩ( ఈ )௧ି ఋ௧ + 0.5ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఈ ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ ௧ି ఋ௧ (15ܽ ) 

ݑߩ( ఈ )ெ஺ொ ݑߩ( = )ݐ , ࢘( ఈ ) ௧ି ఋ௧ ߲ݐߜ − ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ ௧ି ఋ௧ ߲൫ ݐߜ߭+ ఉ ݑߩ( ఈ ) + 2߲ ఊ ݑߩ൫ ఊ ߜ൯ ఈఉ ൯ ௧ି ఋ௧ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ቂ߲ ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ ∗,ெ஺ொ ߲− ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ ௧ି ఋ௧ ቃ(15ܾ ) 13 

ߩெ஺ொ and ݑߩ( ఈ )ெ஺ொ denote the exact solution of semi-discrete MAME without numerical error, and the subscript MAME means that this term is computed by the intermediate values given by the predictor step of the semi-discrete MAME. Owing to its explicitness, this semi-discrete form provides a natural basis for constructing efficient numerical schemes, and it is therefore taken as the reference framework for the present reformulated SLBM. 

2.2.1 Equilibrium-based formulation 

As discussed in subsection 2.1.2, the generalized SLBM formulation is an extension of the SLBM. Since the MAME is chosen as the physically consistent target equations, the objective of this subsection is to recover the semi-discrete MAME with second-order accuracy. In the present method, the generalized SLBM is adopted to reconstruct the predictor step, while the corrector step is essentially a finite-difference discretization. To this end, we begin by recalling that the equilibrium distribution functions ݂  ௜௘௤ uniquely determine the macroscopic variables and fluxes (i.e. ݑߩ ఈ ݑߩ , ఈ ݑఘ , … ) through moments. In particular, the zeroth-, the first-, and the second-order moments of the equilibrium distribution yield the density, the momentum, and the momentum flux tensor, respectively. 

݂෍ ௜௘௤ ௜ߩ = ݁෍ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ௜ݑߩ = ఈ݁෍ ݁௜ఈ ݂௜ఉ ௜௘௤ ௜ߎ = ఈఉ ௘௤ ݑߩ = ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ݁෍ ݁௜ఈ ݁௜ఉ ݂௜ఊ ௜௘௤ ௜ߎ = ఈఉఊ ௘௤ ܿߩ = ௦ଶ ݑ൫ ఈ ߜఉఊ ݑ + ఉ ߜఈఊ ݑ + ఊ ߜఈఉ ൯(16) 

Using these equilibrium moments, the semi-discrete form of the MAME can be rewritten in terms of the moment relations of ݂  ௜௘௤ .

Predictor: 

ߩ ∗ ߩ = ௧ି ఋ௧ ߲ݐߜ − ఈ ݑߩ( ఈ ) ௧ି ఋ௧ + 0.5ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఈ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ௧ି ఋ௧ (17ܽ ) 14 

ݑߩ( ఈ )∗ ݑߩ( = ఈ ) ௧ି ఋ௧ ߲ݐߜ − ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ௧ି ఋ௧ ܿ߭+ ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ௧ି ఋ௧ (17ܾ ) 

Corrector: 

ߩ = )ݐ , ࢘(ߩ ∗ (18ܽ ) 

ݑߩ( ఈ )(ݑߩ( = )ݐ , ࢘ ఈ )∗ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5൰  ݐߜቀ߲ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤,∗ ߲− ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ௧ି ఋ௧ ቁ (18ܾ ) 

or in a more concise way: 

ߩெ஺ொ (ݐ , ࢘) = ߩ ௧ି ఋ௧ ߲ݐߜ − ఈ ݑߩ( ఈ )௧ି ఋ௧ + 0.5ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఈ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ௧ି ఋ௧ (19ܽ ) 

ݑߩ( ఈ ) ெ஺ொ ݑߩ( = )ݐ , ࢘( ఈ )௧ି ఋ௧ ߲ݐߜ − ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ௧ି ఋ௧ ܿ߭+ ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ௧ି ఋ௧ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5൰  ݐߜቀ߲ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ெ஺ொ ߲− ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ௧ି ఋ௧ ቁ(19ܾ ) 

Here ߩெ஺ொ and ݑߩ( ఈ )ெ஺ொ denote the exact solution of semi-discrete MAME without numerical error, and the subscript MAME means that this term is computed by the intermediate values given by the predictor step of the semi-discrete MAME. By adopting predictor operator in subsection 2.1.2, we explicitly construct the following scheme with )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘(ߩ = ߩ , ݑߩ ఈ ݑߩ = ఈ )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘( , ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ߎ = ఈఉ ௘௤ )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘( for simplicity: 

ߩ ∗ ܣ = ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܤ + ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܥ+ ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܦ + ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܰ− ఘ ߩ(20ܽ ) 

ݑߩ( ఈ )∗ ܣ = ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܤ + ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܥ+ ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܦ + ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܰ− ௠ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ )(20ܾ ) 

By performing the Taylor expansion, the above scheme corresponds to the following equations: 

ߩ ∗ ݐݐ = ଴ ݐݐ + ߩ ଵ ߲ݐߜ ఈ ݑߩ ఈ ݐݐ + ଶ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఈ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ݐݐ + ଷ ݐߜ ଷ ߲( ଷ ݐݐ + ) ସ ݐߜ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ ) (21ܽ ) 

ݑߩ( ఈ ) ∗ ݐ = ଴ ݑߩ ఈ ݐ + ଵ ߲ݐߜ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ݐ + ଶ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ݐ + ଷ ݐߜ ଷ ߲( ଷ ) + ݐ ସ ݐߜ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ ) (21ܾ ) 

with 15 

⎩

⎪

⎪

⎪

⎨

⎪

⎪

⎪

⎧ܣఘ ܤ + ఘ ܥ + ఘ ܦ + ఘ ܰ− ఘ ݐݐ = ଴ܣ− ఘ ܤ2 − ఘ ܥ + ఘ ܦ2 + ఘ ݐݐ = ଵܣఘ2 ܤ2 + ఘ + ܥఘ2 ܦ2 + ఘ ݐݐ = ଶ− ܣఘ6 − ܤ4 ఘ3 + ܥఘ6 + ܦ4 ఘ3 ݐݐ = ଷܣఘ24 + ܤ2 ఘ3 + ܥఘ24 + ܦ2 ఘ3 ݐݐ = ସ(22ܽ ) 

and 

⎩

⎪

⎪

⎨

⎪

⎪

⎧ܣ ௠ ܤ + ௠ ܥ + ௠ ܦ + ௠ ܰ− ௠ 0ݐ = ܣ− ௠ ܤ2 − ௠ ܥ + ௠ ܦ2 + ௠ 1ݐ = ܣ ௠2 ܤ2 + ௠ + ܥ௠2 ܦ2 + ௠ 2ݐ = − ܣ ௠6 − ܤ4 ௠3 + ܥ௠6 + ܦ4 ௠3 3ݐ = ܣ ௠24 + ܤ2 ௠3 + ܥ௠24 + ܦ2 ௠3 4ݐ = (22ܾ ) 

In the present formulation, the coefficients ܥ ,ܤ ,ܣ and ܦ appearing in the linear combination of equilibrium distribution functions define the numerical scheme. Through Taylor expansion, these coefficients directly determine the parameters ݐݐ{ ௡ ݐ , ௡ } of the recovered macroscopic equations, where ݊  denotes the order of the associated spatial derivative. Therefore, these parameters possess clear physical meanings associated with the corresponding differential operators. For ݊  ≤ 2 , these parameters are uniquely determined by the mathematical form of the MAME and are explicitly substituted by their physically consistent expressions in the continuity and the momentum equations: 

ݐݐ൜ ଴ = 1, ݐݐ ଵ = −1, ݐݐ ଶ = 12ൠெ஺ொ (23ܽ ) 

ݐ൜ ଴ = 1, ݐ ଵ = −1, ݐ ଶ ܿ߭= ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ߬= − 12ൠெ஺ொ (23ܾ ) 

As a result, the predictor step recovers the semi-discrete MAME with second-order accuracy as 16 

ߩ ∗ ߲ݐߜ − ߩ = ఈ ݑߩ( ఈ ) + 0.5ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఈ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ܱ+ ݐߜ( ଷ ߲, ௟ ݈| ≥ 3)ீ ௌ௅஻ெ ߩ( = ∗ )ெ஺ொ ܱ+ ݐߜ( ଷ ߲, ௟ ݈| ≥ 3)ீ ௌ௅஻ெ (24ܽ ) 

ݑߩ( ఈ )∗ ݑߩ = ఈ ߲ݐߜ − ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ܿ߭+ ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ܱ+ ݐߜ( ଷ ߲, ௟ ݈| ≥ 3)ீ ௌ௅஻ெ ݑߩ(( = ఈ )∗ ) ெ஺ொ ܱ+ ݐߜ( ଷ ߲, ௟ ݈| ≥ 3)ீ ௌ௅஻ெ (24ܾ ) 

where ߩ( ∗ ) ெ஺ொ and ݑߩ(( ఈ )∗ ) ெ஺ொ denote the exact solution of the predictor step of the semi-discrete MAME without numerical error. The subscript GSLBM denotes the error term introduced by the generalized SLBM scheme. In contrast, the parameters associated with higher-order derivatives ( ݊ ≥ 3 ) arise purely from the discretization and the reconstruction procedures and thus represent higher-order truncation errors. Errors of the same formal order are also introduced when the MAME is discretized using finite-difference schemes, although their algebraic forms differ. 

ߩ( ∗ ) ி஽ ߩ( = ∗ ) ெ஺ொ ܱ+ ݐߜ( ଷ ߲, ௟ ݈| ≥ 3) ி஽ (25ܽ ) 

ݑߩ( ఈ ) ∗ி஽ ݑߩ(( = ఈ ) ∗ ) ெ஺ொ ܱ+ ݐߜ( ଷ ߲, ௟ ݈| ≥ 3) ி஽ (25ܾ ) 

While these higher-order terms do not affect the recovery of the target macroscopic equations in second-order accuracy, they play a crucial role in determining the numerical dissipation, dispersion, and stability of the scheme. For the sake of clarity and focus, the present study does not examine the higher-order coefficients in the continuity equation; accordingly, the corresponding parameters 

ݐݐ ଷ and ݐݐ ସ are set to zero, and the subsequent analysis is concentrated on the momentum equation. In particular, the third- and the fourth-order parameters in the momentum equation, denoted by ݐଷ and ݐସ , have a dominant influence on the numerical behaviors, which will be systematically investigated in Sections 3 and 4. Beyond these leading contributions, numerical experiments further indicate that higher-order terms (of order greater than four) can provide additional stabilizing effects, which will be discussed in subsection 4.2.2. 17 In principle, a fully self-consistent numerical formulation would discretize both the predictor and the corrector steps within a unified equilibrium-based framework. As outlined in Appendix C, the generalized SLBM can indeed be extended to such a unified formulation by introducing additional correction terms. However, this extension requires the solution of extra linear systems and leads to a substantial increase in both computational cost and memory usage. Given that the primary objective of the present study is to preserve the memory efficiency of SLBM while achieving physical consistency and explicit control over numerical dissipation, dispersion, and stability, a hybrid strategy is adopted. Specifically, the predictor step is treated by the generalized SLBM formulation, whereas the corrector step is constructed using the finite-difference discretization. This choice is a compromise among accuracy, efficiency, and practical implementation, and allows the influence of the predictor formulation on numerical behavior to be examined in a clearer manner. In summary, the reformulated SLBM is presented as follows Predictor: 

ߩ ∗ ܣ = ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܤ + ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܥ+ ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܦ + ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܰ− ఘ ߩ ௧ି ఋ௧ (26) 

ݑߩ( ఈ )∗ ܣ = ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܤ + ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܥ+ ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܦ + ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܰ− ௠ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ ) ௧ି ఋ௧ (27) 

Corrector: 

ߩ = )ݐ , ࢘(ߩ ∗ (28) 

ݑߩ( ఈ )(ݑߩ( = )ݐ , ࢘ ఈ ) ∗ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ቂ߲ ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ ∗ ߲− ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ ௧ି ఋ௧ ቃ ி஽ (29) 18 where }ܦ ,ܥ ,ܤ ,ܣ{ are determined by solving Eq. 22. It is clear that our method is a 5-point-stencil. So, to maintain consistency, the spatial derivatives in Eq. 29 are discretized by the 5-point-stencil fourth-order finite difference method. Figure 1. Schematic of the 5-point-stencil 

2.2.2 Special parameter selections and their numerical implications 

As discussed in Section 2.2.1, the parameters associated with derivatives up to second order, i.e. ݐ{ ௡ ݊| ≤ 2} , are uniquely determined by the MAME and must be preserved in the predictor step to ensure physical consistency. However, the parameters ݐଷ and ݐସ are associated with numeric beyond the second-order accuracy, which are higher-order truncation effects introduced by the equilibrium-based reconstruction. This provides controllable degrees of freedom for tuning numerical dissipation and dispersion as shown in Section 3. To endow interpretable properties to these higher-order parameters, we consider several typical constructions based on different stencil choices and moment constraints. These selections are not exhaustive, but they cover the main numerical behaviors observed in practice and thus can be the reference cases for the subsequent theoretical and numerical analysis. 1) Elimination of both the third- and the fourth-order errors ࢘ ࢋ ± ࢏ ࢘ݐߜ ࢋ૛ ± ࢏ ݐߜ 19 A natural starting point is to completely suppress the leading high-order truncation terms by enforcing 

ݐଷ = 0, ݐ ସ = 0 

With this choice, the predictor step recovers the semi-discrete MAME up to fourth order without additional dispersive or dissipative corrections. And it can be used as a useful baseline for showcasing effects of higher-order terms. 2) One-layer stencil construction. In the second configuration, only a single layer of neighboring lattice points are used in the equilibrium reconstruction, corresponding to setting the coefficients associated with the outer stencil to zero (i.e., ܦ = ܤ = 0 ). With this restriction, the remaining parameters can be determined uniquely by solving the resulting linear system (Eq. 22), yielding explicit expressions for ݐଷ and ݐସ as 

ݐଷ = − 16 ݐ , ସ  ߬= 12 − 124 

This choice leads to nonzero values of both parameters and represents the simplest nontrivial equilibrium-based construction beyond the minimal stencil. The numerical behavior is then dictated by the competition between the third- and the fourth-order terms. 3) Asymmetric three-point stencil with ݐଷ = 0 : backward extension. To isolate the effect of the fourth-order dissipation term while eliminating the leading dispersive error, we further consider a three-point stencil composed of 

࢘( ࢋ − ௜ ࢘( ,)ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ࢋ + ௜ ࢘( ,)ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ࢋ2 − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ 

By enforcing the condition ݐଷ = 0 , the remaining coefficients can be uniquely determined, leading to the specific reference value of ݐସ = ఛଵଶ − ଵ଼ . This construction introduces an asymmetric stencil and allows showcasing only the high-order dissipative effects. 20 4) Asymmetric three-point stencil with ݐଷ = 0 : forward extension. The counterpart configuration of the previous case is the forward extension, whose stencil reads 

܍ − ܚ( ௜ ,ݐߜ ܍ + ܚ( ,)ݐߜ − ݐ ௜ ,ݐߜ ܍2 + ܚ( ,)ݐߜ − ݐ ௜ ,ݐߜ .)ݐߜ − ݐ 

In this case, the fourth-order coefficient is solved as: 

ݐଷ = 0, ݐ ସ  ߬= 12 + 124 

However, in our tests, this setting always tends to diverge, implying the association between the fourth-order derivative and the numerical stability. Therefore, we list this stencil choice here for completeness, but will not use it in the rest of this article. In summary, the above selections generate two typical values of ݐଷ and three typical values of ݐସ , which will be combined to constitute cases A–E (see Table 1) to be studied in Sections 3 and 4. By anchoring all parameter choices to explicit stencil constructions and moment constraints, the present approach avoids heuristic tuning and provides a transparent framework for interpreting the dissipation–dispersion characteristics observed in subsequent analyses. 

2.2.3 Implementation procedure 

The practical implementation of the RSLBM proceeds as follows: 1) Specify the mesh spacing ݔߜ and time step ݐߜ . Determine the single relaxation parameter according to the physical setting for the flow problem. 2) Specify the parameters ݐݐ{ ௡ , ݐ௡ } according to the target macroscopic equations and the desired treatment of higher-order derivative terms. In this work, 

ݐ൜ ଴ = 1, ݐ ଵ = −1, ݐ ଶ ܿ߭= ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ߬= − 12ൠ21 while ݐ{ ଷ ݐ , ସ } are selected following the strategies introduced in Section 2.2.2. 3) Obtain coefficients ܣ൛ ఘ ܤ , ఘ ܥ , ఘ ܦ , ఘ ൟ and ܣ{ ௠ ܤ , ௠ ܥ , ௠ ܦ , ௠ } by solving Eq. (22). This procedure is performed once prior to the simulation. 4) Initialize the macroscopic flow variables according to the prescribed initial conditions. 5) Predictor step. Compute the predicted macroscopic quantities using Eq. (26) and (27). 6) Apply boundary conditions to the predicted macroscopic variables. 7) Corrector step. Discretize the spatial derivatives in Eq. (29) using the finite-difference formula, and update the macroscopic variables to the next time level. 8) Apply boundary conditions to the updated macroscopic variables. 9) Repeat Steps 5) – 8) until the simulation reaches the prescribed final time or convergence criterion. Since the predictor step involves only equilibrium distribution functions, the RSLBM still avoids storing distribution functions and therefore retains a memory footprint comparable to that of the original SLBM. All coefficients are determined prior to the simulation and introduce no additional runtime cost. This equilibrium-based reconstruction further enables direct control of contributions from higher-order derivatives through the parameters ݐଷ and ݐସ , which, as will be demonstrated in Sections 3 and 4, play a central role in controlling numerical dissipation, dispersion, and stability. With proper parametric choices, the reformulated SLBM achieves accuracy comparable to the finite-difference solvers of the MAME (Section 4.1), while higher-order truncation terms beyond the fourth order are found to provide additional numerical stabilization in under-resolved conditions (Section 4.2). Boundary conditions are imposed directly on macroscopic variables as in the original SLBM [12].However, near-boundary mesh nodes 22 require special treatments due to stencil reduction, and the adopted strategy together with its numerical implications will be discussed in Section 4.3. 

## 3 Linear wave analysis 

In this section, following the approach of Lallemand et al. [9], the linear wave analysis is adopted to provide a more transparent assessment of numerical dissipation and dispersion. It should be emphasized that this analysis is not intended to replace a complete stability analysis, but rather to offer a focused and semi-quantitative characterization of numerical dissipation and dispersion in controlled conditions. For clarity, the analysis is restricted to one-dimensional setting. The analysis focuses on the predictor step, while the corrector step is treated using the finite-difference discretization described previously. The results elucidate the numerical origins of the strong dissipation observed in the original SLBM and clarify the role of tunable high-order terms in the present reformulated SLBM. These observations will be further examined and validated through numerical benchmarks in Section 4. 

3.1 Numerical simulation of the shear wave 

In this study, the linear shear wave problem is employed to quantify numerical dissipation and dispersion. The availability of an analytical solution allows the numerical solution to be interpreted in terms of the effective viscosity and the numerical phase velocity, thereby enabling direct and quantitative assessments of numerical dissipation and dispersion. All simulations are conducted with relatively low lattice viscosity, corresponding to high Reynolds number conditions in hydrodynamic problems. The relaxation time is chosen as ߬  =0.501 , which corresponds to the lattice viscosity of ߭  ௟௕ ≈ 3.3333 × 10ି ସ .

The initial condition is a small-amplitude shear wave, 23 

ܷ൝ ௬ ݏ݋ܿܣ = ൬ݔߨ2 ߣ ܷ൰ ௫ ݐ݊ܽݐ݊ݏ݋ ܿ= (30) 

where ܣ is sufficiently small to ensure linearity (here 10 = ܣି ସ ), ߣ is the wavelength, and the periodic boundary condition is applied. The computational domain length ݔߜ ܰ= ܮ is chosen such that it is an integer multiple of the wavelength, ensuring exact periodicity. To flexibly control the wave resolution, the wavelength is expressed as 

݉݊= ߣ ,ݔߜ (31) 

where ݊  and ݉  are integers which means m wavelengths is resolved by n mesh cells. This formulation allows a wave to be resolved by an arbitrary number of grid cells as long as ݊ܰ  ݉/ ܰ∈ ା , and avoids the restriction that a single wavelength must be discretized into an integer number of cells. The corresponding wave number rescaled by the mesh scale is given by ݇ = ݊ߨ݉2 . (32) 

In these conditions, the problem reduces to a linear convection–diffusion equation with the analytical solution of ܷ ௬ ߭−( ݌ݔ݁ܣ = ݇௟௕ ଶ ݐ) cos ቀ ݇൫ ݔ−ܷ ௕௚ ൯ቁݐ (33) 

where, ߭  ௟௕ denotes the physical viscosity and ܷ  ௕௚ is the background flow velocity. All quantities are expressed in lattice units. Due to unavoidable numerical dissipation and dispersion, the numerical solution can be expressed in the following form: ܷ ௬ ߭൫− ݌ݔ݁ܣ = ݇௘௙௙ ଶ ݐ൯ cos൫ ݔ( ݇−ܿ ௡௨௠ ൯)ݐ (34) 24 where ߭  ௘௙௙ and ܿ  ௡௨௠ denote the effective viscosity and numerical phase velocity. Based on these definitions, the extra numerical viscosity brought by the numerical scheme can be quantified by ߭ ௡௨௠ ߭= ௘௙௙ ߭− ௟௕ . (35) 

To obtain ߭  ௡௨௠ and ܿ  ௡௨௠ , the temporal evolution of the velocity at a fixed spatial location (here ݔ = 0 ) is recorded, and nonlinear least-square fitting is performed. Only the fitting results with the coefficient of determination ܴ  ଶ > 0.999 are retained to ensure reliability. It should be reaffirmed that linear wave analysis is inherently limited to one-dimensional, linearized settings and therefore provides only a semi-quantitative assessment of numerical dissipation and dispersion. The conclusions drawn from this section are intended to offer physical insights and trend-level understanding, while the actual performance of the reformulated SLBM in nonlinear and multidimensional problems will be further examined through numerical benchmarks in Section 4. 

3.2 Discussions on the numerical dissipation and dispersion 

To systematically investigate the numerical dissipation and dispersion characteristics induced by different high-order terms, representative parametric combinations are selected for comparison in this section. As discussed in Section 2, the present formulation introduces a set of tunable coefficients associated with higher-order derivative terms, which can be adjusted independently to isolate their numerical effects. Based on this property, five parametric settings (see Table 1), denoted as case A to case E, are constructed to facilitate discussions. Specifically, cases A–C progressively eliminate high-order contributions, providing a clear reference sequence from the combined effects of the third- and the fourth-order derivatives to the configuration in which both are suppressed. Cases D and E further 25 separate the influence of the fourth-order derivatives by setting ݐଷ = 0 while varying ݐସ .Together, these cases provide a systematic basis for assessing the individual and combined roles of ݐଷ and ݐସ in numerical dissipation and dispersion, and the results will be used to compare with the original SLBM. Using these five cases, the numerical dissipation and dispersion properties are examined in two different flow configurations. Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 respectively consider situations without and with a constant background convective velocity, corresponding to the pure diffusion and the convection–diffusion problems. This separation enables identifying and comparing the roles of the high-order terms in the diffusion-dominated and the convection-involved regimes. Table 1. Parameter setting for third and fourth order derivatives case t 3 t 4A − 1                

> 6߬ 12 −1
> 24
> B−1
> 60C00D0߬ 12 −1
> 8
> E0߬ 12 −1
> 24

3.2.1 Cases without background flow (U bg =0) 

We first consider the pure diffusion problem by setting the background velocity to zero, i.e., ܷ ௕௚ = 0 . This setting removes the convective effect and allows isolated examinations of the numerical dissipation introduced by different predictor-step formulations. Figure 2 presents the fitting results of the temporal decay of ܷ  ௬ at ݔ = 0 . This confirms that the shear wave remains within the linear regime throughout the simulations. It can be clearly 26 observed that the solution obtained by the original SLBM decays to zero in a very short time, indicating the strong dissipation even in mild diffusion conditions. To quantitatively compare the dissipative behavior of different parameter cases, the viscosity ratio is introduced as 

߭ฬ = ߟ ௘௙௙ ߭− ߭௟௕ ௟௕ ฬ = ฬ߭ ߭௡௨௠ ௟௕ ฬ (36) 

where ୣߥ ୤୤ denotes the effective viscosity extracted from fitting, ߥ୪ୠ is the physical lattice viscosity, and ߥ୬୳୫ represents the additional numerical viscosity introduced by the numerical scheme. A viscosity ratio of zero corresponds to an ideal situation, while values greater than zero indicate extra dissipation brought by the numerical scheme. The viscosity ratio is plotted on a logarithmic scale in Figure 3. In this figure, solid markers denote cases with ߥ୬୳୫ > 0 ,corresponding to extra numerical dissipation, while empty markers denote cases with ߥ୬୳୫ < 0 ,i.e., negative numerical viscosity. It should be noted that, although negative numerical viscosity is observed in some cases, the total effective viscosity remains positive ( ୣߥ ୤୤ > 0 ), ensuring numerical stability. As shown in Figure 3, the original SLBM introduces exceptionally large numerical viscosities, with viscosity ratios ranging from ܱ  (10) to ܱ  (10 ଶ ) even at moderate wave numbers, indicating the over-dissipation and suggesting that the original SLBM may excessively damp delicate physical features such as minor vortical structures in practical simulations. Case D reproduces a comparable dissipation level, serving as a useful benchmark for strong numerical damping. This similarity suggests that case D is expected to exhibit behaviors close to the original SLBM in hydrodynamic simulations, a conjecture that will be verified in Section 4.2. Although case D reproduces dissipation levels comparable to the original SLBM, their mechanisms are distinct. In the original SLBM, excessive dissipation originates from the coupling 27 of physical deviations and numerical errors, as discussed in Section 2. In contrast, in case D, the strong dissipation arises solely from the specific choice of the fourth-order coefficient, ݐସ ߬= /12 − 1/8 , demonstrating that the reformulated SLBM can emulate SLBM-like stability characteristics through controllable discretization of the high-order terms. In contrast, in all remaining cases, the viscosity ratios are consistently lower than those of the original SLBM by at least three orders of magnitude over the entire range of tested wave numbers. This significant reduction in numerical dissipation indicates that the present reformulated SLBM with these parametric choices can provide a much closer approximation to the underlying physical diffusion process. Interestingly, these cases are characterized by negative numerical viscosity, implying that the effective viscosity is slightly smaller than the physical viscosity. Nevertheless, since ୣߥ ୤୤ remains positive, numerical stability is preserved. A systematic comparison among the remaining cases reveals that the numerical dissipation is primarily governed by the fourth-order coefficient ݐସ . Cases A and B, which differ only in ݐସ ,display clearly separated viscosity-ratio curves, while a similar separation is observed between cases C and E, both with ݐଷ = 0 . In contrast, cases sharing the same ݐସ but different ݐଷ values— namely, cases A and E, as well as cases B and C—exhibit nearly overlapped curves, indicating that the influence of the third-order derivatives on the numerical dissipation is negligible in the absence of background flow. Further insight can be obtained by examining the wave-number dependence of the viscosity ratio. Except for case D, cases A, B, C, and E tend to collapse at high wave numbers, while remaining well separated at low and intermediate wave numbers. This behavior indicates that, in pure diffusion problems, the dissipation control associated with ݐସ is most pronounced for large-scale (low-wave-number) modes, whereas high-frequency dissipation becomes less sensitive to 28 parametric variations. Moreover, the higher viscosity ratio observed in case E corresponds to a stronger negative numerical viscosity, i.e., further reduced dissipation. This trend suggests that increasing the value of ݐସ leads to lower dissipation in the setting of pure diffusion. In summary, for pure diffusion problems, the numerical dissipation of the reformulated SLBM is dominated by fourth-order derivative terms with its influence being most significant in the low- and intermediate-wave-number range, and the contribution from the third-order derivatives is negligible. a) Fitting curves of the SLBM for ݇  = ߨ/2 (left) and ݇  = ߨ/5 (right). a) Fitting curves of the present RSLBM for ݇  = ߨ/2 (left) and ݇  = ߨ/5 (right). Figure 2. Illustrations of the fitting curves of a) the SLBM and b) the present RSLBM (with parameter choice of ݐଷ = − ଵ଺ ݐ , ସ = ఛଵଶ − ଵଶସ 

). The with circles represent the numerical results, the blue dot lines represent the analytical solution and the red solid line represents the fitting curved. All fitting lines correspond to a ܴ  ଶ larger than 0.999. 29 Figure 3. Numerical dissipation with a zero steady background flow. 

3.2.2 Cases with constant background flow (U bg =constant) 

We next consider convection–diffusion problems by introducing a uniform background flow with ܷ  ୠ୥ = 0.05 and 0.10 . Compared with the pure diffusion case, the presence of background convection introduces additional numerical effects through the coupling between advection and diffusion, making it possible to simultaneously examine numerical dissipation and numerical dispersion. Representative fitting results with the selected wave number are shown in Figure 4. To quantitatively assess the numerical dissipation, the viscosity ratio is plotted in a logarithmic scale in the lower half of Figure 5, where solid markers denote ߥ୬୳୫ >0 and empty markers denote ߥ୬୳୫ < 0 . In addition, to quantify numerical dispersion, the phase velocity ratio 

ܿ= ߪ ܷ௡௨௠ ௕௚ (37) 

is plotted in the upper half of Figure 5, where values closer to unity indicate more accurate solution of wave propagation. 30 We first examine the numerical dispersion behavior. For the two background velocities considered, the dispersion curves exhibit very similar trends, indicating that the qualitative dispersion characteristics are weakly dependent on ܷ  ୠ୥ within the tested range. It can be observed that the highest wave-number modes cannot be well conveyed by all methods considered, resulting in the chessboard-type pattern. This is consistent with the symmetry properties of the present finite-difference–like stencil. A clear grouping of the dispersion curves can be observed. The curves of cases A and B overlap, as do those of cases C and E, which can be explained by that each pair shares the same third-order coefficient ݐଷ . In contrast, pronounced separation occurs between cases A and E, as well as between cases B and C, where only ݐଷ differs. These comparisons demonstrate that the numerical dispersion, quantified by phase velocity errors, is primarily governed by the third-order derivative term. The dispersion curve of the original SLBM closely matches those of cases A and B over the entire wave-number range, which can be directly attributed to their identical effective third-order coefficient ݐଷ = −1/6 , as detailed in Appendix B. Although case D exhibits the smallest dispersion error due to a substantially reduced fourth-order contribution, this improvement is achieved at the cost of extremely strong dissipation and is therefore of limited practical relevance. The dissipation characteristics, shown in the lower panels of Figure 5, reveal a different but complementary picture. For cases with ݐଷ = 0 (cases C, D, and E), the dissipation levels differ with the values of the fourth-order coefficient ݐସ , confirming that ݐସ establishes the baseline numerical dissipation. In the presence of background convection, however, the spectral sensitivity of ݐସ differs from that observed in the previous pure diffusion problem. For cases C and E, which have similar ݐସ values, the dissipation curves are most clearly separated in the intermediate wave-31 number range, while remaining relatively close at low and high wave numbers. This indicates that, in convective conditions, the dissipation control associated with ݐସ is most effective for intermediate-wave-number modes. Moreover, the viscosity ratio increases with increasing background velocity in the intermediate-wave-number range. It suggests that, when ݐଷ = 0 , ݐସ

should be reduced to a sufficiently negative value as the local Mach number increases in order to maintain a stable solution. When ݐଷ is nonzero, as in cases A and B, an additional convection-induced dissipation becomes dominant and largely masks the influence of ݐସ . As a result, the dissipation curves of cases A and B remain close over most of the wave-number range. This additional dissipation intensifies with increasing background velocity ܷ  ௕௚ and primarily affects low- and intermediate-wave-number modes, where the numerical viscosity transitions from negative to positive. With increasing ܷ  ௕௚ , the affected wave-number range extends toward higher frequencies, indicating a growing dominance of the contribution from the third-order derivatives in theconvective flow. These results indicate that, in convective–diffusive problems, the numerical dissipation of the reformulated SLBM is fundamentally determined by ݐସ , while a nonzero ݐଷ introduces an additional, velocity-dependent dissipative mechanism that becomes dominant when the background velocity increases. 

3.3 Summary of linear wave analysis 

The linear wave analysis reveals two key mechanisms governing the numerical behavior of the present reformulated SLBM. First, numerical dispersion is dominated by the third-order derivative term associated with ݐଷ , which introduces phase errors and reproduces the dispersion behavior of the original SLBM when ݐଷ = −1/6 . In addition, the same term generates velocity-32 dependent numerical dissipation in the presence of background convection, indicating that non-zero ݐଷ may result in overly strong dissipation at higher flow velocities in long-time simulations. Second, the fourth-order coefficient ݐସ determines the baseline dissipation level. Its spectral sensitivity depends on the flow regime: in pure diffusion it mainly affects low- and intermediate-wave-number modes, whereas in convective conditions its influence is most pronounced at intermediate wave numbers. Based on these findings, the most effective strategy for simultaneously minimizing numerical dispersion and avoiding excessive convective dissipation is to set ݐଷ = 0 . In this condition, numerical dissipation can be more flexibly and robustly controlled through ݐସ .As will be demonstrated in Section 4, case E ( ݐସ ߬= /12 − 1/24 ) recovers dissipation closer to the physics, while case C ( ݐସ = 0 ) offers enhanced numerical stability. The performance of these parametric choices in nonlinear flow simulations will be examined by benchmark problems. a) Fitting curves of the SLBM for ݇  = ߨ/2 (left) and ݇  = ߨ/10 (right). 33 b) Fitting curves of the present RSLBM for ݇  = ߨ/2 (left) and ݇  = ߨ/10 (right). Figure 4. Illustrations of the fitting curves of a) the SLBM and b) the present RSLBM (with parameter choice of ݐଷ = − ଵ଺ ݐ , ସ = ఛଵଶ − ଵଶସ 

) at ܷ  ௕௚ = 0.05 . The with circles represent the numerical results, the 

blue dot lines represent the analytical solution, the red solid lines represent the fitting curves and the green lines represent the envelopes. All fitting lines correspond to a ܴ  ଶ larger than 0.999. Figure 5. Numerical dispersion and dissipation with a constant background convective flow of ܷ  ௕௚ =

0.05 (left) and ܷ  ௕௚ = 0.10 (right). 34 

## 4 Numerical tests 

The 1-D linear wave analysis in Section 3 provides a mechanistic understanding of the numerical dissipation and dispersion of the original SLBM and the reformulated SLBM. In this section, we further assess how these properties manifest in nonlinear, multidimensional flow problems through three benchmarks. Specifically, the Taylor–Green vortex flow is used to examine accuracy and convergence. The double shear layer flow is employed to investigate numerical dissipation, dispersion, and stability in both resolved and under-resolved conditions. Finally, the lid-driven cavity flow is simulated to evaluate boundary treatment and the ability to resolve delicate flow structures on coarse meshes. For clarity, the following abbreviations are used throughout this section. “LBM” denotes the standard BGK lattice Boltzmann method, while “SLBM” refers to the original simplified lattice Boltzmann method. “MAME-2nd” and “MAME-4th” denote solvers in which the predictor step of the MAME is discretized using second- and fourth-order finite-difference schemes, respectively, with the corrector step always solved by a fourth-order finite difference. “case A–E” refer to the parametric combinations of the reformulated SLBM introduced in Table 1. 

4.1 Taylor-Green vortex flow 

To assess the accuracy of the reformulated SLBM, the two-dimensional Taylor–Green vortex flow is simulated using different numerical schemes. The analytical solution reads [44]: 

ܷ− = )ݐ ,ݕ ,ݔ(ݑ ଴ cos ൬ ݔߨ2 ܮ ൰ sin ൬ ݕߨ2 ܮ ൰ exp ൬−8ߨ ܷଶ ଴ ܴ݁ݐ ܮ ∙ ൰ܷ= )ݐ ,ݕ ,ݔ(ݒ ଴ sin ൬ ݔߨ2 ܮ ൰ cos ൬ ݕߨ2 ܮ ൰ exp ൬−8ߨ ܷଶ ଴ ܴ݁ݐ ܮ ∙ ൰݌ = )ݐ ,ݕ ,ݔ(݌ ଴ − 14 ߩܷ଴ ଴ଶ ൤cos ൬ ݔߨ4  ܮ ൰ + cos ൬ ݕߨ4 ܮ ൰൨ exp ൬−16ߨ ܷଶ ଴ ܴ݁ݐ ܮ ∙ ൰(38) 35 where ܷ  ଴ denotes the amplitude of the initial velocity filed; ߩ଴ is the reference density; ݌଴ is the background pressure, taken as ݌଴ ߩ = ܿ଴ ௦ଶ .The size of the computational domain is set to be [0, ܮ ,0[ × ]ܮ] and three uniform mesh sizes ( [51 × 51] , [76 × 76] , [101 × 101] ) are employed to study grid convergence. The Reynolds number is defined as Re ܷ= ଴ ߥ/ܮ and is fixed at 10. Periodic boundary conditions are applied in both directions. Numerical solutions at the non-dimensional time ݐ ∗ ܷݐ = ଴ /0.5 = ܮ 

and ݐ ∗ = 1.0 are compared with the analytical solution. The relative error is quantified by the ܮ ଶ

norm: 

ܮ ଶ =ට∑ ࢛ቀ ௜,௝ ௡௨௠௘௥௜௖௔௟ ࢛− ௜,௝ ௔௡௔௟௬௧௜௖௔௟ ቁ ଶ௜,௝ ට∑ ࢛ቀ ௜,௝ ௔௡௔௟௬௧௜௖௔௟ ቁ ଶ௜,௝ (39) 

where the superscripts “numerical” and “analytical” denote the numerical and the analytical solutions, respectively. Figure 6 shows the convergence behavior of all methods. As expected, all schemes exhibit second-order convergence, which is consistent with the second-order accuracy of the underlying lattice Boltzmann framework. Among the tested methods, the original SLBM and MAME-2nd yield the largest relative errors. In contrast, both case C and case E of the reformulated SLBM show lower relative errors, while case E is consistently more accurate than case C on all mesh sizes. This improvement can be attributed to the reduced numerical dissipation associated with the fourth-order derivative term, as analyzed in Section 3.2. It is also observed that the error curves of case C almost coincide with those of MAME-4th. This agreement can be expected, since both approaches eliminate the third- and the fourth-order derivative error terms at the level of the reconstructed macroscopic equations. Nevertheless, the reformulated SLBM achieves this consistency with simpler formulations, avoiding the complex 36 discretization required by fourth-order finite-difference schemes, especially for mixed derivatives such as ∂ ௫௬ . Although higher-order derivative terms ( ܱ ߲( ௡ ݊,) > 4 ) differ between the two approaches, these differences do not affect the convergence behavior in the present test. Their influence on stability, however, becomes evident in more challenging flow configurations and will be discussed in Section 4.2. Figure 6. Comparison of relative errors between different methods at Re=10 with ݐ∗ = 0.5 (left) and b) 

ݐ∗ = 1.0 (right). Slopes of the fitting lines for [LBM, SLBM, MAME-2 nd , MAME-4 th , present case C, present case E] are [1.9994, 1.9942, 1.9912, 2.0086, 1.9969, 2.0024] (left) and [1.9980, 1.9885, 1.9828, 2.0056, 1.9940, 2.0312] (right). 

4.2 Double shear layer flow 

The double shear layer flow is employed to further examine the numerical dissipation, dispersion, and stability of the reformulated SLBM in a strongly convective and vortex-dominated flow. This problem involves sharp velocity gradients and rapid roll-up of shear layers, making it particularly sensitive to both numerical dissipation and dispersion, and is therefore well suited for validating the parametric effects identified in Section 3. The computational domain is [0, ܮ ,0[ × ]ܮ] with periodic boundary conditions applied in both directions. The initial velocity field is prescribed as      

> 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 -lg( Er )-lg( Δx/L )

t* = 0.5 LBM SLBM MAME-2nd MAME-4th Present caseC Present caseE slope = 2 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 -lg( Er )-lg( Δx/L )

t* = 1.0 LBM SLBM MAME-2nd MAME-4th Present caseC Present caseE slope = 2 37 

ܷ൞ = ݑ ଴ tanh ቂ80 ቀ ݕ ܮ − 0.25ቁቃ , ݕ ܮ ≤ 0.5ܷ ଴ tanh ቂ80 ቀ0.75 − ݕܮቁቃ , ݕ ܮ > 0.5 ܷ0.05 = ݒ ଴ sin ቂ2ߨ ቀ ݔ ܮ + 0.5ቁቃ (40) 

> where

ܷ  ଴ is the characteristic velocity and is chosen as 0.04 here; the Reynolds number is set to be ܴ݁  ܷ= ଴ 10000 = ߥ/ܮ . The simulations were run until ݐ ∗ ܷ= ଴ 2.0 = ܮ/ݐ . For clarity, the values of the parameters used in this section are summarized in Table 2. These parametric sets are designed to isolate the effects of the third- and the fourth-order derivative terms, enabling a direct comparison with the dissipation and dispersion characteristics predicted by the linear wave analysis. Table 2. Parameter setting for third and fourth order derivatives with specific values. Here, the relaxation time ߬  = 0.503072 for mesh size of 257 × 257 .case t 3 t 4A − 1                            

> 6߬ 12 −1
> 24 ≈2.56 ×10 ିସ
> B−1
> 60C00D0߬ 12 −1
> 8≈−0.0831
> E0߬ 12 −1
> 24 ≈2.56 ×10 ିସ

4.2.1 Well-resolved case on the mesh size of 257×257: dissipation and dispersion 

The decay of kinetic energy is first examined to provide a global and quantitative measure of numerical dissipation. The kinetic energy is normalized and defined as ݇ = ܷ1 ଴ଶ ඵ 12 ݑ( ଶ ݒ + ଶ ߗ݀) ఆ(41) 38 and is compared with the reference results obtained by the pseudo-spectral method of Minion et al. [45]. As shown in Figure 7, both the original SLBM and case D exhibit the fastest decay of the kinetic energy among all tested schemes. This behavior is consistent with the strong numerical dissipation identified in the linear wave analysis of Section 3.2. In contrast, the remaining cases of the present reformulated SLBM show significantly slower decay, indicating reduced numerical dissipation. Figure 7. The kinetic energy decay of different methods with a mesh size of 257×257 at Re=10000. The reference data is obtained with pseudo-spectral method [45]. To further examine how numerical dissipation manifests in local flow structures, the vorticity contours at ݐ ∗ = 1.0 are first compared, as shown in Figure 8. A clear qualitative difference can be observed among the tested methods. The original SLBM and case D exhibit nearly identical excessive dissipation, while case C preserves the finer flow structures. This behavior is consistent with the dissipation characteristics predicted by the linear wave analysis in Section 3.2. It is worth noting that the dissipation of the original SLBM is so strong that even with a mesh resolution as fine as 1025 × 1025 , the vortical structures remain severely damped.      

> 0.44 0.45 0.46 0.47 0.48 0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00
> Kinetic Energy
> t* Reference SLBM Present (caseA) Present (caseB) Present (caseC) Present (caseD) Present (caseE)

39 To provide a more quantitative assessment, the vorticity distribution along the vertical centerline 0.5 = ܮ/ݔ at ݐ ∗ = 1.0 is plotted in Figure 9 for the original SLBM and the RSLBM (case C and case D). Compared with other methods, the vorticity peaks produced by the original SLBM and case D are significantly broader and lower, indicating both a reduction in peak intensity a) LBM b) Original SLBM c) Present, case C d) Present, case D Figure 8. The contour plots of vorticity at ݐ∗ = 1.0 from −70 to 70 by an increment of 10. The a) LBM result is simulated at a mesh size of 1025 × 1025 as a reference result while the results, of b) Original SLBM, c) Present case C and d) Present case D, are simulated at a mesh size of 257 × 257 .40 and an artificial diffusion of the shear layers. These features are typical signatures of excessive numerical dissipation and confirm, in a more quantitative manner, the observations of the vorticity contours. a) b) c) Figure 9. Distribution of vorticity along the vertical centerline x/L =0.5 for the SLBM and the present RSLBM (case C, case D) at ݐ∗ = 1.0. a) Global view of the curve; b) and c) zoom-in view. The LBM result is simulated at a mesh size of 1025 × 1025 as a reference result. The influence of numerical dispersion is examined next. Figure 10 presents the vorticity contours at ݐ ∗ = 1.0 for cases A, B, and E. In contrast to the strong dissipation observed in the original SLBM and case D, the overall vorticity structures produced by these three cases are close to the reference. This indicates that their numerical dissipation levels are comparable, consistent with their similar values of ݐସ . Only in some localized regions can slight deviations from the reference be identified by visual inspection, suggesting that the numerical dissipation alone is insufficient to distinguish their numerical behaviors at this level.                 

> -30 -20 -10 010 20 30 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
> Vor y / L
> LBM SLBM Present (caseC) Present (caseD) 510 15 20 25 30 0.50 0.52 0.54 0.56 0.58 0.60 -4 -2 0240.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70

41 a) LBM b) Present, case A c) Present, case B d) Present, case E Figure 10. The contour plots of vorticity at ݐ∗ = 1.0 from −70 to 70 by an increment of 10. The a) LBM results are simulated on the mesh size of 1025 × 1025 as the reference while the results, of b) Present case A, c) Present case B and d) Present case E, are simulated on the mesh size of 257 × 257 .To further quantify these differences, the vorticity distribution along the vertical centerline 

0.5 = ܮ/ݔ is plotted in Figure 11. Physically, the vorticity structures should be convected from the right to the left in Figure 11, corresponding to downward transport in the computational domain. All three cases produce peak amplitudes that are very close to the reference LBM solution, again 42 confirming that their numerical dissipation is nearly the same. However, clear differences emerge in the phase behavior. For case A and case B, noticeable phase delays are observed, together with small oscillations near the downstream side of the vorticity peak, particularly near its base. These features indicate that part of the high-wavenumber components propagate with an underestimated phase velocity, a characteristic manifestation of numerical dispersion. In contrast, when the third-order derivative term is eliminated by setting ݐଷ = 0 , as in case E (and also case C shown previously in Figure 9), both the phase lag and the spurious oscillations disappear. This observation is consistent with the dispersion analysis in Section 3.2 and further confirms that the third-order derivative terms play a dominant role in controlling numerical dispersion. (a) (b) (c) Figure 11. Distribution of vorticity along the vertical centerline x/L =0.5 for the present RSLBM (case A, case B, case E) at ݐ∗ = 1.0. a) Global view of the curve; b) and c) zoom-in view. The LBM results are simulated on the mesh size of 1025 × 1025 as the reference. For comparison, the performance of finite-difference-based MAME solvers is also examined and the results are presented in Figure 12. Although both MAME-2 nd and MAME-4 th initially produce convergent solutions, the results obtained with MAME-2 nd exhibit spurious oscillations                 

> -30 -20 -10 010 20 30 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
> Vor y / L
> LBM Present (caseA) Present (caseB) Present (caseE) 510 15 20 25 30 0.50 0.52 0.54 0.56 0.58 0.60 -4 -2 0240.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70

43 in the upper-left and bottom-right regions of the domain. As the simulation proceeds beyond ݐ ∗ =1.0 , these oscillations develop into two non-physical secondary spurious vortices. Such behavior is commonly associated with numerical dispersion [46] and could be attributed to the presence of the specific uncanceled third-order derivative terms of MAME-2 nd , which inevitably arise when the second-order finite-difference schemes are employed. In contrast, MAME-4 th does not suffer from this issue and produces physically consistent flow structures. Finally, a direct comparison between case C of the reformulated SLBM and MAME-4 th is presented in Figure 12(c). The vorticity contours obtained by the two approaches overlap almost perfectly, confirming that both methods effectively eliminate the third- and the fourth-order derivative errors at the macroscopic level. This observation is fully consistent with the results of the Taylor–Green vortex test in Section 4.1 and further demonstrates that the present reformulated SLBM can achieve the accuracy of the fourth-order finite-difference MAME solver. a) MAME-2 nd , ݐ∗ = 0.6 (left) and ݐ∗ = 1.0 (right). 44 b) MAME-4 th , ݐ∗ = 0.6 (left) and ݐ∗ = 1.0 (right). c) Comparison between case C (black solid lines) and MAME-4 th (red dot), ݐ∗ = 0.6 (left) and ݐ∗ =

1.0 (right). Figure 12. The contour plots of vorticity at ݐ∗ = 0.6 and ݐ∗ = 1.0 from −70 to 70 by an increment of 10. a) MAME with second order finite difference; b) MAME with fourth order finite difference; c) Comparison between case C and MAME-4 th .

4.2.2 Under-resolved case on the mesh size of 129×129: stability test 

Having examined the dissipation and dispersion characteristics of different methods on a well-resolved mesh in the previous subsection, we now turn to a more stringent test that focuses on numerical stability. The under-resolved mesh of 129 × 129 is employed for the double shear 45 layer flow, a configuration known to be highly sensitive to numerical errors due to the rapid development of small-scale vortical structures [45,47,48]. Since the reformulated SLBM and the MAME-n th formulations are designed to recover the same macroscopic equations, it is natural to directly compare their stability properties. In the present simulations, both MAME-2nd and MAME-4th fail to produce stable solutions and diverge at an early stage of ݐ ∗ ≤ 0.2 . In contrast, the reformulated SLBM with case C remains stable throughout the simulation and yields physically meaningful flow structures. As discussed in Section 4.1, case C and MAME-4th both eliminate the third- and the fourth-order derivative error terms and therefore exhibit nearly identical accuracy in well-resolved regimes. Consequently, the observed stability gap must originate from differences in truncation terms beyond the fourth order. In this sense, the distinctive structure of the higher-order derivatives inherent to the reformulated SLBM acts as an additional numerical stabilization mechanism, which becomes particularly important when the mesh resolution is insufficient. The stability performance of the different methods is summarized in Table 3. Remarkably, the present reformulated SLBM remains stable even on extremely coarse meshes, down to 

17 × 17 , whereas all MAME-based schemes fail in similar conditions. Moreover, with the under-resolved resolution of 129 × 129 , the reformulated SLBM successfully avoids the emergence of spurious vortices that are observed in the LBM, as illustrated in Figure 12 a) and Figure 13. These results demonstrate that the reformulated SLBM achieves a favorable balance between accuracy and robustness, offering superior stability while preserving physically consistent flow features even in under-resolved simulations. 46 a) LBM b) Present, case E Figure 13. The contour plots of vorticity at ݐ∗ = 1.0 from −70 to 70 by an increment of 10, with under-resolved mesh size of 129 × 129 . The results are simulated by a) the LBM and b) the present RSLBM (case E). Table 3. Stability examination for different methods at various mesh size. “Y” and “N” denotes the existence of spurious vortex; “…” denotes numerical divergence. Mesh Method Spurious vortex Status 

257 × 257 

Present N Stable LBM N Stable MAME-2nd Y Stable MAME-4th N Stable 

129 × 129 

Present N Stable LBM Y Stable MAME-2nd … Diverge MAME-4th … Diverge 

65 × 65 

Present Y Stable LBM Y Stable MAME-2nd … Diverge MAME-4th … Diverge 

33 × 33 

Present Y Stable LBM … Diverge MAME-2nd … Diverge MAME-4th … Diverge 

17 × 17 

Present Y Stable LBM … Diverge MAME-2nd … Diverge MAME-4th … Diverge 47 

4.3 Lid-driven cavity 

The two-dimensional lid-driven cavity flow is a widely used benchmark for incompressible flow solvers. As shown in Figure 14, a square cavity of size ܮ = 1 is considered, in which the top lid moves with a constant velocity ܷ  = 0.1 while the remaining three walls are stationary. The Reynolds number is defined as ܴ݁  ܮ ܷ= ߥ/ and is set to ܴ݁  = 7500 , corresponding to a high-Reynolds-number case with steady-state solution. All simulations are advanced in time until convergence to the steady state. The convergence criterion here is defined as 

ට∑ ࢛൫ ௜,௝ ௧ାఋ௧ ࢛− ௜,௝ ௧ ൯ଶ௜,௝ ට∑ ࢛൫ ௜,௝ ௧ାఋ௧ ൯ଶ௜,௝ < 10ି଼ . (42) 

> Figure 14. Configuration of the lid-driven cavity flow.

The mesh spacing is denoted by ܰ/1 = ݔߜ , where ܰ  is the number of mesh cells along each direction, and the mesh size is then ܰ( + 1) × (ܰ + 1) . The performance of the present reformulated SLBM is compared with the original SLBM. Based on the stability analysis in Section 3.2 and the numerical tests in Section 4.2, case C ( ݐସ = 0 ) is employed for ܰ  = 100 to ensure stability on the coarsest meshes, while case E ( ݐସ ߬= /12 − 1/24 ) is adopted in finer mesh 48 resolutions with ܰ  ≥ 150 , where improved accuracy can be achieved without compromising robustness. As a five-point-stencil scheme, the reformulated SLBM requires special treatment near the boundaries, where insufficient neighboring nodes are available. Two possible strategies can be considered. The first is to switch locally to case A, which reduces the stencil to three points. The second is to adopt a hybrid formulation by coupling the present method with MAME-n th , which solves the same macroscopic equations and offers greater flexibility in handling boundary nodes. Although case A is attractive from the implementation standpoint, the dissipation analysis in Section 3.2 indicates that, in the presence of relatively high velocities, case A introduces excessive numerical dissipation due to the contribution of the third-order derivative terms. This effect is particularly pronounced near the moving lid, where the local velocity is the highest. While such dissipation may not significantly affect short-time simulations, such as the double shear layer flow in Section 4.2, it becomes detrimental in steady problems like the lid-driven cavity, which essentially corresponds to long-time integrations of a transient solver. Consequently, the use of case A near the boundary leads to overly diffused boundary layers and incorrect velocity distributions. For this reason, a hybrid scheme is adopted in which the interior flow is solved using the reformulated SLBM, while the near-boundary region is treated with MAME-2 nd , which has been shown to be accurate and robust for the lid-driven cavity simulations in previous studies (see, Lu et al. [43]). The coupling strategy is illustrated in Figure 15. This hybrid approach preserves the low-dissipation properties of the present method in the bulk flow while maintaining numerical robustness near the boundaries. 49 Figure 15. Illustration of the boundary treatment. We first assess the accuracy of large-scale vortex structures by comparing velocity profiles along the horizontal and the vertical centerlines with the reference data of Ghia et al. [49], as shown in Figure 16. The RSLBM achieves satisfactory agreements with the reference solution at the resolution of 1/200 = ݔߜ , whereas the original SLBM requires a significantly finer mesh of 

1/300 = ݔߜ to obtain comparable accuracy. This difference is consistent with the dissipation analysis in Section 3.2, which showed that the original SLBM introduces substantial numerical viscosity even at relatively low wavenumbers, leading to excessive damping of large-scale flow features. a) Velocity distributions of the present RSLBM (left) and the SLBM (right) along ݕ/ܮ = 0.5.

Boundary node Interior node Near boundary node Interior —— present method Near boundary —— MAME-2 nd Boundary —— Dirichlet B.C.           

> -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Uy / U x / L
> N=100 N=150 N=200 N=250 N=300 Ghia et al. -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Uy / U x / L
> N=100 N=150 N=200 N=250 N=300 Ghia et al.

50 b) Velocity distributions of the present RSLBM (left) and the SLBM (right) along ݔ/ܮ = 0.5.Figure 16. Velocity distributions along centerlines of the lid-driven cavity flow at Re = 7500. A more stringent comparison is performed by examining the streamline patterns, which illustrates the method’s ability to capture small-scale vortical structures. According to the reference solution of Ghia et al., the lid-driven cavity flow at ܴ݁  = 7500 consists of one primary central vortex, one top-left vortex (TL1), two bottom-left vortices (BL1 and BL2), and three bottom-right vortices (BR1, BR2 and BR3). As shown in Figure 17, in a relatively coarse resolution of = ݔߜ 1/150 , the present method successfully resolves the secondary vortices in both bottom corners, including the small-scale BL2 and BR2 structures. In contrast, the original SLBM completely omits these vortices in the same resolution due to its strong numerical dissipation. Although the BR2 vortex begins to appear in the original SLBM solution at 1/300 = ݔߜ , accurate resolution of both BL2 and BR2 is not achieved until the mesh is refined to 1/500 = ݔߜ . This enhanced accuracy is further quantified in Table 4, which compares the locations of vortex centers with the reference data and shows good agreements for the reformulated SLBM in all tested resolutions. For BR3 vortex, although not accurate enough, the RSLBM with the mesh size of 1/500 = ݔߜ 

is able to recover it as illustrated in Figure 17 d1) while the original SLBM fails.                 

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> y / L Ux / U
> N=100 N=150 N=200 N=250 N=300 Ghia et al. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> y / L Ux / U
> N=100 N=150 N=200 N=250 N=300 Ghia et al.

51 a1) Present, N=150 a2) SLBM, N=150 b1) Present, N=300 b2) SLBM, N=300 52 c1) Present, N=500 c2) SLBM, N=500 d1) Local vortex structure at bottom right corner for the present RSLBM, N=500 d2) Local vortex structure at bottom right corner for SLBM, N=500 Figure 17. Snapshots of streamlines for the lid-driven cavity flow at Re = 7500 obtained by the present RSLBM and the original SLBM with different mesh spacing. The performance of MAME-n th is comparable to the RSLBM in terms of accuracy when sufficiently fine meshes are used. However, the finite-difference-based MAME-n th schemes remain stable only in resolutions finer than  ݔߜ≤ 1/200 , whereas the present hybrid scheme maintains stability on coarser meshes. 53 Overall, these results demonstrate that the proposed hybrid approach effectively combines the low-dissipation properties of the reformulated SLBM with the boundary robustness of MAME-2 nd, enabling accurate and stable simulation of high-Reynolds-number flows at significantly reduced computational cost on lower mesh sizes compared to the original SLBM. Table 4. Location of vortices at Re = 7500. X and Y denote the dimensionless coordinates at x and y-directions. “…” denote vortex can’t be resolved. Primary TL1 BL1 Method Mesh X Y X Y X Y                                                                                             

> Present
> 151×151 0.5098 0.5354 0.0679 0.9091 0.0658 0.1428 251×251 0.5128 0.5324 0.0674 0.9112 0.0650 0.1507 301×301 0.5130 0.5321 0.0673 0.9115 0.0648 0.1514 SLBM
> 151×151 0.5137 0.5348 0.0493 0.9271 0.0743 0.1415 251×251 0.5137 0.5321 0.0565 0.9236 0.0680 0.1506 301×301 0.5137 0.5138 0.0620 0.9184 0.0668 0.1517 Ghia et al. 0.5117 0.5322 0.0664 0.9129 0.0645 0.1504 BL2 BR1 BR2 Method Mesh XYXYXY
> Present
> 151×151 0.0086 0.0091 0.7728 0.0693 0.9458 0.0477 251×251 0.0105 0.0108 0.7888 0.0664 0.9521 0.0413 301×301 0.0107 0.0111 0.7899 0.0660 0.9523 0.0411 SLBM 151×151 ……0.7982 0.0703 ……251×251 ……0.7883 0.0651 0.9761 0.0210 301×301 ……0.7881 0.0642 0.9691 0.0258 Ghia et al. 0.0117 0.0117 0.7813 0.0625 0.9492 0.0430

## 5 Conclusion 

This work establishes a comprehensive understanding of the numerical dissipation, dispersion, and stability properties of the simplified lattice Boltzmann method (SLBM). By introducing a generalized SLBM formulation, it is shown that the macroscopic equations recovered by the SLBM contain intrinsic physical deviations and numerical truncation errors, which, for the first time, explains the numerical limitations of the SLBM exhibited in practical simulations. 54 To address these limitations, the reformulated SLBM (RSLBM) is proposed. The RSLBM utilizes the more actual macroscopic equation (MAME) as the target macroscopic equations to be recovered and thus successfully removes the physical deviations in the original SLBM. The predictor–corrector strategy is used to reconstruct macroscopic solutions to the target equations. The predictor step is constructed within the generalized SLBM framework with explicitly controllable high-order parameters ݐଷ and ݐସ , while the corrector step is based on the finite-difference discretization. Linear wave analysis reveals the distinct contributions of these parameters. The third-order derivative term governed by ݐଷ dominates the numerical dispersion and, in the presence of background flow, introduces additional velocity-dependent numerical dissipation, whereas the fourth-order derivative term associated with ݐସ determines the baseline dissipation level and stability characteristics. These results provide a physically motivated and practically useful guideline for the parameter selection of the RSLBM. Numerical experiments are then conducted to validate the analysis. The Taylor–Green vortex demonstrates accuracy and convergence comparable to the finite-difference schemes. The double shear layer problem confirms the linear wave predictions: the RSLBM shows reduced dispersion and dissipation errors and enhanced stability, with high-order derivative terms providing additional stabilization. The lid-driven cavity flow further illustrates the capability of the RSLBM in capturing delicate vortical structures on relatively coarse grids while maintaining numerical stability. In summary, the RSLBM retains the simplicity and memory efficiency of the original SLBM while significantly reducing its dissipation and dispersion. The free parameters in the RSLBM allow flexible adjustment of the magnitude of the high-order derivative terms and thus contribute to fine tuning its numerical performance without sacrificing accuracy. Future work will be focused 55 on adaptive parameter selection based on local flow conditions, extensions to complex geometries through hybrid formulations, and applications to mesh refinement strategies. 

## Appendix Appendix A: Derivation of the generalized SLBM scheme 

Inspired by the simplified lattice Boltzmann method (SLBM), this appendix constructs the general mathematical formulation that preserves the equilibrium-based reconstruction principle underlying the SLBM. The objective is to establish an analytical representation that serves as a basis for subsequent theoretical analysis. This formulation provides a convenient setting for examining the structural properties of SLBM-type approaches and is employed throughout the derivations and analysis presented in Appendix B. We first focus on the predictor step and start by introducing a set of auxiliary functions that are used to reconstruct macroscopic quantities from equilibrium information as follows: 

ℎఘ ܣ൫൛ ఘ ܤ , ఘ ܥ , ఘ ܦ , ఘ ݂;ൟ ௜௘௤ ݇− ݎ( ࢋ ௜ ݇|)ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ = ±1, ±2൯, )1ܣ( 

and 

ℎ ௠,ఈ ܣ{൫ ௠ ܤ , ௠ ܥ , ௠ ܦ , ௠ ݂;} ௜௘௤ ݇− ݎ( ࢋ ௜ ݇|)ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ = ±1, ±2൯. )2ܣ( 

These functions are defined solely in terms of the equilibrium moments and will be used to construct the predicted macroscopic quantities. Their explicit definitions are given in: 

ℎఘ ܣ = ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܤ + ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܥ+ ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܦ + ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜, )3ܣ( 

and 56 

ℎ ௠,ఈ ܣ = ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܤ + ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܥ+ ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܦ + ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜)4ܣ( 

where all quantities depend on the local macroscopic variables evaluated at the corresponding time step. To analyze the macroscopic behavior implied by this construction, we perform the Taylor expansion in space around the current lattice node. Here, we denote ݂  ௜௘௤ ݂= )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘( ௜௘௤ for simplicity: ݂ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ݇− ࢋ ௜ ݂= )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜௘௤ ݇− ݁(ݐߜ ߲௜ఈ ఈ ݂) ௜௘௤ + 1݇2 ଶ ݐߜ ଶ ݁( ߲௜ఈ ఈ ) ݂ଶ ௜௘௤ − 1݇6 ଷ ݐߜ ଷ ߲( ଷ ) + 1݇24 ସ ݐߜ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ ))5ܣ( 

with moment relationship of partial derivatives as 

݁( ෍ ߲௜ఈ ఈ ݂) ௜௘௤ ௜߲= ఈ ݑߩ ఈ݁෍ ௜ఈ ݁൫ ߲௜ఉ ఉ ݂൯ ௜௘௤ ௜߲= ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ݁( ෍ ߲௜ఈ ఈ ) ݂ଶ ௜௘௤ ௜߲= ߲ఈ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ݁෍ ௜ఈ ݁൫ ߲௜ఉ ఉ ൯ ݂ଶ ௜௘௤ ௜߲= ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ )6ܣ( 

Substitute the above relationships into Eqs. A3-4. The resulting expansion, truncated at the certain order, is summarized in 

ℎఘ ܣ൫ = ఘ ܤ + ఘ ܥ + ఘ ܦ + ఘ ൯ߩ + ൫−ܣ ఘ ܤ2 − ఘ ܥ + ఘ ܦ2 + ఘ ߲ݐߜ൯ ఈ ݑߩ ఈ+ ൬ 12 ܣఘ ܤ2 + ఘ + 12 ܥఘ ܦ2 + ఘ ݐߜ ൰ ߲ଶ ߲ఈ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ൬− 16 ܣఘ − 43 ܤఘ + 16 ܥఘ + 43 ܦఘ ݐߜ ൰ ଷ ߲( ଷ )+ ൬ 124 ܣఘ + 23 ܤఘ + 124 ܥఘ + 23 ܦఘ ݐߜ ൰ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ ))7ܣ( 

and 57 

ℎ ௠,ఈ ܣ( = ௠ ܤ + ௠ ܥ + ௠ ܦ + ௠ ݑߩ) ఈ + (−ܣ ௠ ܤ2 − ௠ ܥ + ௠ ܦ2 + ௠ ߲ݐߜ) ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ൬ 12 ܣ ௠ ܤ2 + ௠ + 12 ܥ௠ ܦ2 + ௠ ݐߜ ൰ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ + ൬− 16 ܣ ௠ − 43 ܤ௠ + 16 ܥ௠ + 43 ܦ௠ ݐߜ ൰ ଷ ߲( ଷ )+ ൬ 124 ܣ௠ + 23 ܤ௠ + 124 ܥ௠ + 23 ܦ௠ ݐߜ ൰ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ ))8ܣ( 

In this stage, no assumption is made on the specific form of the reconstruction coefficients, and the expansion remains valid for any equilibrium-based reconstruction as long as the moment relations are valid. Based on these auxiliary functions, the predictor reconstruction operator, denoted by ݃  ఘ and ݃ ௠,ఈ -operator, is defined to represent the reconstruction at the predictor level. The definition of the predictor operator is given in ݃ ఘ = ℎ ఘ ܰ− ఘ ,ߩ )9ܣ( 

and ݃ ௠,ఈ = ℎ ௠,ఈ ܰ− ௠ ݑߩ( ఈ ), (10ܣ) 

with )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘(ߩ = ߩ and ݑߩ ఈ ݑߩ( = ఈ )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘() . We defined the predicted values as 

ߩ ∗ ݃= ఘ ݑߩ( , ఈ )∗ ݃= ௠,ఈ ݑ , ఈ∗ ݑߩ( = ఈ ) ∗ ߩ/ ∗ (11ܣ) 

By substituting Eqs. A3-A8, the resulting expressions for the predicted density and momentum are summarized in 

ߩ ∗ = ℎ ఘ ܰ− ఘ ߩܣ = ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܤ + ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܥ+ ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܦ + ఘ ݂෍ ∙ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܰ− ఘ ߩݐݐ = ଴ ݐݐ + ߩ ଵ ߲ݐߜ ఈ ݑߩ ఈ ݐݐ + ଶ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఈ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ݐݐ + ଷ ݐߜ ଷ ߲( ଷ ݐݐ + ) ସ ݐߜ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ )(12ܣ) 58 

ݑߩ( ఈ )∗ = ℎ ௠,ఈ ܰ− ௠ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ )ܣ = ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܤ + ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܥ+ ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܦ + ௠ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ࢋ2 + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܰ− ௠ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ )ݐ = ଴ ݑߩ ఈ ݐ + ଵ ߲ݐߜ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ݐ + ଶ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ݐ + ଷ ݐߜ ଷ ߲( ଷ ) + ݐ ସ ݐߜ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ )(13ܣ) 

with 

⎩

⎪

⎪

⎪

⎨

⎪

⎪

⎪

⎧ܣఘ ܤ + ఘ ܥ + ఘ ܦ + ఘ ܰ− ఘ ݐݐ = ଴ܣ− ఘ ܤ2 − ఘ ܥ + ఘ ܦ2 + ఘ ݐݐ = ଵܣఘ2 ܤ2 + ఘ + ܥఘ2 ܦ2 + ఘ ݐݐ = ଶ− ܣఘ6 − ܤ4 ఘ3 + ܥఘ6 + ܦ4 ఘ3 ݐݐ = ଷܣఘ24 + ܤ2 ఘ3 + ܥఘ24 + ܦ2 ఘ3 ݐݐ = ସ(14ܣ) 

and 

⎩

⎪

⎪

⎨

⎪

⎪

⎧ܣ ௠ ܤ + ௠ ܥ + ௠ ܦ + ௠ ܰ− ௠ ݐ = ଴ܣ− ௠ ܤ2 − ௠ ܥ + ௠ ܦ2 + ௠ ݐ = ଵܣ ௠2 ܤ2 + ௠ + ܥ௠2 ܦ2 + ௠ ݐ = ଶ− ܣ ௠6 − ܤ4 ௠3 + ܥ௠6 + ܦ4 ௠3 ݐ = ଷܣ ௠24 + ܤ2 ௠3 + ܥ௠24 + ܦ2 ௠3 ݐ = ସ(15ܣ) 

In the corrector step, the reconstruction uses a new equilibrium distribution function evaluated by the intermediate properties obtained by the predictor step. Let us define, ݂ ௜௘௤,∗ (࢘ ) =݂ ௜௘௤ ߩ൫ ∗ (࢘ ), (ݑ ఈ ) ∗ () ࢘൯. (16ܣ) 

It is emphasized that the moment relations required for the subsequent analysis remain valid in this stage, not due to any additional assumptions, but as a direct consequence of the mathematical form of the equilibrium distribution function itself. The moments can be explicitly written as follows, 59 

݂෍ ௜௘௤,∗ ௜ߩ = ∗݁෍ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤,∗ ௜ݑߩ( = ఈ ) ∗݁෍ ݁௜ఈ ݂௜ఉ ௜௘௤,∗ ௜ߎ = ఈఉ ௘௤,∗ ݑߩ൫ = ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯ ∗݁෍ ݁௜ఈ ݁௜ఉ ݂௜ఊ ௜௘௤,∗ ௜ߎ = ఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗ ܿߩቀ = ௦ଶ ݑ൫ ఈ ߜఉఊ ݑ + ఉ ߜఈఊ ݑ + ఊ ߜఈఉ ൯ቁ ∗(17ܣ) 

The equilibrium moments computed from the predicted state therefore satisfy the same algebraic relations as those used in the predictor step. Since the continuity equation has already been fully recovered in the predictor step and does not require correction, the auxiliary functions for the corrector step are introduced only for the momentum components, which are given in 

ℎ ௠,ఈ ∗ ܣ{൫ ௠∗ ܤ , ௠∗ ܥ , ௠∗ ܦ , ௠∗ ݂;} ௜௘௤,∗ ݇− ݎ( ࢋ ௜ ݇|)ݐߜ = ±1, ±2൯. (18ܣ) 

The explicit definitions are given in: 

ℎ ௠,ఈ ∗ ܣ = ௠∗ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤,∗ ࢘( ࢋ − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܤ + ௠∗ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤,∗ ࢘( ࢋ2 − ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܥ+ ௠∗ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤,∗ ࢘( ࢋ + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ܦ + ௠∗ ݁෍ ∙ ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤,∗ ࢘( ࢋ2 + ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜(19ܣ) 

The spatial Taylor expansion together with Eq. A15 is then performed in the same manner as for the predictor step: 

ℎ௠,ఈ ∗ ܣ( = ௠∗ ܤ + ௠∗ ܥ + ௠∗ ܦ + ௠∗ ݑߩ() ఈ ) ∗ + (−ܣ ௠∗ ܤ2 − ௠∗ ܥ + ௠∗ ܦ2 + ௠∗ ߲ݐߜ) ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤,∗ + ൬ 12 ܣ ௠∗ ܤ2 + ௠∗ + 12 ܥ௠∗ ܦ2 + ௠∗ ݐߜ ൰ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗ + ൬− 16 ܣ௠∗ − 43 ܤ௠∗ + 16 ܥ௠∗ + 43 ܦ௠∗ ݐߜ ൰ ଷ ߲( ଷ )+ ൬ 124 ܣ ௠∗ + 23 ܤ௠∗ + 124 ܥ௠∗ + 23 ܦ௠∗ ݐߜ ൰ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ ), (20ܣ) 

with denotations 60 

⎩

⎪

⎪

⎨

⎪

⎪

⎧ ܣ ௠∗ ܤ + ௠∗ ܥ + ௠∗ ܦ + ௠∗ ݐ = ଴∗ܣ− ௠∗ ܤ2 − ௠∗ ܥ + ௠∗ ܦ2 + ௠∗ ݐ = ଵ∗12 ܣ ௠∗ ܤ2 + ௠∗ + 12 ܥ௠∗ ܦ2 + ௠∗ ݐ = ଶ∗− 16 ܣ ௠∗ − 43 ܤ௠∗ + 16 ܥ௠∗ + 43 ܦ௠∗ ݐ = ଷ∗124 ܣ ௠∗ + 23 ܤ௠∗ + 124 ܥ௠∗ + 23 ܦ௠∗ ݐ = ସ∗(21ܣ) 

Based on the above construction, a corrector reconstruction operator, denoted as the ݃  ∗ -operator, is defined to represent the equilibrium-based correction of the predicted momentum. Its definition is given by ݃ ௠,ఈ ∗ = h ௠,ఈ ∗ ܰ− ௠∗ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ ). (22ܣ) 

By substituting A18, we get ݃௠,ఈ ∗ ݐ = ଴∗ ݑߩ( ఈ ) ∗ ܰ− ௠∗ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ )ݐ+ ଵ∗ ߲ݐߜ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤,∗ ݐ + ଶ∗ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗ ݐ+ ଷ∗ ݐߜ ଷ ߲( ଷ ) + ݐ ସ∗ ݐߜ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ )(23ܣ) 

By combining the predictor and the corrector reconstructions, the generalized SLBM formulation can be obtained. The resulting expressions, given in 

)ߩ( ௌ௅஻ெ (ݐ , ࢘) = ℎ ఘ ܰ− ఘ ,ߩ ∙ (24ܣ) 

and 

ݑߩ( ఈ )ௌ௅஻ெ (ݐ , ࢘) = ℎ ௠,ఈ ܰ− ௠ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ ) +  ܯ∙ ቀℎ ௠,ఈ ∗ ܰ− ௠∗ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ )ቁ =݃ ௠,ఈ ݃∙ ܯ − ௠,ఈ ∗ , (25ܣ) 

represents the most general equilibrium-based predictor–corrector reconstruction in which all coefficients, ܣ{ ఘ ܤ , ఘ ܥ , ఘ ܦ , ఘ ܰ, ఘ }, ܣ{ ௠ ܤ , ௠ ܥ , ௠ ܦ , ௠ ܰ, ௠ } and ܣ{ ௠∗ ܤ , ௠∗ ܥ , ௠∗ ܦ , ௠∗ ܰ, ௠∗ }, associated with the predictor and the corrector stages are treated as parameters of the numerical scheme. At this point, it is noted that the continuity equation in Eq. A24 has already been addressed in subsection 2.2.1, and the subsequent analysis therefore focuses on the momentum equations in Eq. A25. 61 By substituting A11 and A18, we can obtain the actual macroscopic equation correspond to the generalized SLBM formulation: 

ݑߩ( ఈ )ீ ௌ௅஻ெ (ݐ , ࢘) = ݐ ଴ ݑߩ ఈ ݐ + ଵ ߲ݐߜ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ݐ + ଶ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ݐ+ ଷ ݐߜ ଷ ߲( ଷ ) + ݐ ସ ݐߜ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ )∙ ܯ+ ⎝⎜⎜⎜⎛ݐ( ଴∗ ݐ଴ ܰ− ௠∗ ݑߩ() ఈ )ݐቀ ݐߜ+ ଵ߲∗ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ݐ + ଴∗ ݐ߲ଵ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ቁݐߜ+ ଶ ݐቀ ଶ߲∗ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ݐ + ଴∗ ݐ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ቁݐߜ+ ଷ ݐ൫ ଷ∗ ߲( ଷ,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ) + ݐ ଴∗ ݐଷ ߲( ଷ )൯ ݐߜ+ ସ ݐ൫ ସ∗ ߲( ସ,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ) + ݐ ଴∗ ݐସ ߲( ସ )൯ +ܱ ݐߜ( ହ )⎠ ⎟⎟⎟⎞ (26ܣ) 

From the above expression, it can be observed that the generalized SLBM construction suffers from an intrinsic deficiency. In particular, the ܱ  ݐߜܯ( ଶ ) term 

ݐ଴∗ ݐଶ߲  ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ , (27ܣ) 

cannot be eliminated within the present equilibrium-based predictor–corrector framework. As will be shown in the subsequent analysis, the coefficients ݐ{ ௡ ݊∣ ≤ 2} are determined by the mathematical structure of the governing equations and the underlying physical model, and therefore are generally nonzero. Moreover, the parameter ܯ is also nonvanishing in practical applications. Consequently, this term persists regardless of the choice of specific parameters. The presence of this term weakens the global second-order accuracy of the recovered momentum equation. To achieve second-order accuracy, the right-hand side of the discrete formulation must be at least ܱ  ݐߜ( ଷ ), since both sides are divided by ݐߜ to approximate the time derivative, as presented in Eq. 12. This behavior reflects an intrinsic limitation of the generalized SLBM formulation, which, in general, cannot be removed through parameter adjustment. A brief preview of these intrinsic limitations is given here, while their detailed implications for the SLBM and the SS-SLBM will be analyzed in Appendix B. 62 To further substantiate the above observation, we anchor the generalized SLBM formulation to the semi-discrete MAME. In order to remain consistent with the physical constraints imposed by the MAME and to preserve second-order temporal accuracy as much as possible, several non– higher-order coefficients are no longer free and must satisfy specific relations. These constraints are given by 

ݐ଴ = 1, ݐ ଵ = −1, ݐ ଶ = ܿߥ ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ݐ , ଶ∗ = 0, ݐ ଴∗ ݐ଴ ܰ− ௠∗ = 0 (28ܣ) 

where the first three conditions originate from the mathematical structure of the governing equations and the physical requirements of the MAME, while the remaining relations follow the equilibrium-based reconstruction of the corrector step. In addition, to ensure that the predictor–corrector formulation provides a consistent approximation of the temporal derivative, an additional constraint must be satisfied, 

ݐଵ∗ ݐ− = ଴∗ ݐଵ , (29ܣ) 

Combining the above relations yields 

ݐଵ∗ ݐ = ଴∗ ܰ= ௠∗ ݐ = ∗ ≠ 0, (30ܣ) 

It is therefore evident that the parameters ݐ{ ௡ ݐ , ௡∗ ݊∣ ≤ 2} are fully determined by the mathematical form of the governing equations together with the physical constraints of the MAME, and cannot be regarded as free parameters. Once the remaining higher-order parameters ݐ{ ଷ , ݐସ , ݐଷ∗ , ݐସ∗ } are specified, all undetermined coefficients in the generalized SLBM formulation are fixed. Specifically, the coefficients ܣ{ ௠ ܤ , ௠ ܥ , ௠ ܦ , ௠ ܰ, ௠ } and ܣ{ ௠∗ , ܤ௠∗ , ܥ௠∗ , ܦ௠∗ ܰ, ௠∗ } are obtained by solving the following linear systems: 63 

⎩

⎪

⎪

⎪

⎨

⎪

⎪

⎪

⎧ ܣ ௠ ܤ + ௠ ܥ + ௠ ܦ + ௠ ܰ− ௠ ݐ = ଴ = 1, ܣ− ௠ ܤ2 − ௠ ܥ + ௠ ܦ2 + ௠ ݐ = ଵ = −1, 12 ܣ ௠ ܤ2 + ௠ + 12 ܥ௠ ܦ2 + ௠ ݐ = ଶ = ܿߥ ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ,− 16 ܣ ௠ − 43 ܤ௠ + 16 ܥ௠ + 43 ܦ௠ ݐ = ଷ ,124 ܣ ௠ + 23 ܤ௠ + 124 ܥ௠ + 23 ܦ௠ ݐ = ସ ,(31ܣ) 

And 

⎩

⎪⎪

⎨

⎪⎪

⎧ ܣ ௠∗ ܤ + ௠∗ ܥ + ௠∗ ܦ + ௠∗ ܣ− = ௠∗ ܤ2 − ௠∗ ܥ + ௠∗ ܦ2 + ௠∗12 ܣ ௠∗ ܤ2 + ௠∗ + 12 ܥ௠∗ ܦ2 + ௠∗ ݐ = ଶ∗ = 0 − 16 ܣ ௠∗ − 43 ܤ௠∗ + 16 ܥ௠∗ + 43 ܦ௠∗ ݐ = ଷ∗124 ܣ௠∗ + 23 ܤ௠∗ + 124 ܥ௠∗ + 23 ܦ௠∗ ݐ = ସ∗(32ܣ) 

Here, 

ݐ ∗ ݐ = ଴∗ ݐ = ଵ∗ ܰ= ௠∗ ܣ = ௠∗ ܤ + ௠∗ ܥ + ௠∗ ܦ + ௠∗ ≠ 0 (33ܣ) 

An important consequence of this construction is that the coefficient ݐସ∗ cannot vanish. If ݐସ∗ = 0 ,the above linear system admits only the trivial solution ݐ ∗ ≡ 0 , regardless of the value of ݐଷ∗ .Consequently, the fourth-order corrected temporal derivative term ∂ (ସ,∗) cannot be eliminated in the generalized SLBM formulation, which further confirms the intrinsic nature of the limitation identified above. Now we have 

ݑߩ( ఈ )ீ ௌ௅஻ெ ୑୅୑୉ ݑߩ = )ݐ , ࢘( ఈ ߲ݐߜ − ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ܿ߭+ ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ݐ+ ଷ ݐߜ ଷ ߲( ଷ ) + ݐ ସ ݐߜ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ )ݐܯ+ ∗ ߲ቀ ݐߜቂ ∙ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ߲− ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ݐߜ + ቁ ଶ ݐቀ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ቁቃ ݐܯ+ ∗ ∙⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎡ ݐߜ ଷ ൭ݐଷ∗ݐ ∗ ߲( ଷ,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ) + ݐ ଷ ߲( ଷ )൱ ݐߜ+ ସ ൭ݐସ∗ݐ ∗ ߲( ସ,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ) + ݐ ସ ߲( ସ )൱ +ܱ ݐߜ( ହ )⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎤ (34ܣ) 

With the physical constrain from semi-discrete MAME 64 

ݐܯ ∗ ܿ߭= ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5 (35ܣ) 

and the numerical error from the predictor step 

ߎఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ெ஺ொ ߎ = ఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ܱ+ ݐߜ( ଷ ) ௣௥௘ௗ (36ܣ) 

We obtain the final actual macroscopic equations corresponding to the generalized SLBM formulation: 

ݑߩ( ఈ )ீ ௌ௅஻ெ ୑୅୑୉ ݑߩ = )ݐ , ࢘( ఈ ߲ݐߜ − ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ܿ߭+ ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5൰ ∙  ݐߜቀ߲ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ߲− ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ቁܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5൰ ∙ ݐߜ ଶ ܿ߭൬ ௦ଶ ߲ݐߜ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ൰ݐ[+ ଷ ݐߜ ଷ ߲( ଷ ) + ݐ ସ ݐߜ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ )] ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5൰ ∙ ⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎡ ݐߜ ଷ ൭ݐଷ∗ݐ ∗ ߲( ଷ,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ) + ݐ ଷ ߲( ଷ )൱ ݐߜ+ ସ ൭ݐସ∗ݐ ∗ ߲( ସ,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ) + ݐ ସ ߲( ସ )൱ +ܱ ݐߜ( ହ )⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎤ݑߩ( = ఈ ) ୑୅୑୉ ܿ߭൬ + )ݐ , ࢘( ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙ܱ ݐߜ( ଷ ) ௣௥௘ௗ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5൰ ∙ ݐߜ ଶ ܿ߭൬ ௦ଶ ߲ݐߜ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ൰ݐ[+ ଷ ݐߜ ଷ ߲( ଷ ) + ݐ ସ ݐߜ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ )] ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5൰ ∙ ⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎡ ݐߜ ଷ ൭ݐଷ∗ݐ ∗ ߲( ଷ,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ) + ݐ ଷ ߲( ଷ )൱ ݐߜ+ ସ ൭ݐସ∗ݐ ∗ ߲( ସ,∗,ீௌ௅஻ெ ) + ݐ ସ ߲( ସ )൱ +ܱ ݐߜ( ହ )⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎤(37ܣ) 

As can be seen, additional error terms are added to the solution of semi-discrete MAME. There exist two term which cannot be eliminated: the ߲( ଶ ) term induced by the ݐଶ parameter which will weaken the global second-order accuracy, and the ݐସ∗ ߲( ∙ ସ,∗ ) term which is induced by the limitation of the mathematical structure of the semi-discrete MAME ( ݐ ∗ ≠ 0 ). 65 In summary, inspired by the original SLBM, a generalized equilibrium-based predictor– corrector formulation has been constructed in this appendix. The formulation reconstructs macroscopic quantities through linear combinations of auxiliary functions defined on equilibrium moments, and the recovered macroscopic equations are obtained via systematic Taylor expansion. Within this formulation, the coefficients ݐ{ ௡ ݊∣ ≤ 2} are determined by the mathematical structure of the governing equations and the physical constraints of the target macroscopic model, whereas the remaining higher-order coefficients are associated with truncation errors. The analysis further reveals an intrinsic limitation of the generalized SLBM formulation. Due to the equilibrium-based predictor–corrector structure, certain higher-order terms cannot, in general, be eliminated through parameter adjustment, which threatens the global second-order accuracy. This conclusion provides the theoretical basis for the detailed analyses of the SLBM and the SS-SLBM presented in Appendix B. 

Appendix B: Theoretical analysis of the SLBM and SS-SLBM 

Building upon the generalized SLBM formulation in Appendix A, this appendix applies the resulting analytical framework to the simplified lattice Boltzmann method (SLBM) and its variant (SS-SLBM). This analysis provides a concrete illustration of how the intrinsic limitations identified in Appendix A manifest in specific SLBM-type schemes. 

B1 Analysis for the simplified lattice Boltzmann method (SLBM) 

For the original SLBM, the reconstruction coefficients take the specific values 

ܣ{ ௠ = 1, ܤ ௠ = 0, ܥ ௠ = 0, ܦ ௠ = 0,ܰ ௠ = 0} ௌ௅஻ெ ܣ{ ௠∗ = 0, ܤ ௠∗ = 0, ܥ ௠∗ = 1, ܦ ௠∗ = 0,ܰ ௠∗ = 1} ௌ௅஻ெ )1ܤ( 

The corresponding parameters in the generalized SLBM formulation are given by 66 

ݐ൜ ଴ = 1, ݐ ଵ = −1, ݐ ଶ = 12 ݐ , ଷ = − 16 ݐ , ସ = 124 ൠௌ௅஻ெ ݐ൜ ଴∗ = 1, ݐ ଵ∗ = 1, ݐ ଶ∗ = 12 ݐ , ଷ∗ = 16 ݐ , ସ∗ = 124 ൠௌ௅஻ெ ܯ ௌ௅஻ெ ܿ߭= ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5 )2ܤ( 

It is evident that the coefficients ݐ{ ௡ ݐ , ௡∗ ݊∣ ≤ 2} ୗ୐୆୑ differ from those required by the MAME. This discrepancy reflects an essential physical difference between the SLBM and the MAME, rather than the choice of numerical parameters. Substituting the above SLBM parameters into the generalized formulation derived in Appendix A yields the macroscopic momentum equation recovered by the SLBM, given by 

ݑߩ( ఈ )ீ ௌ௅஻ெ ௌ௅஻ெ ݑߩ = )ݐ , ࢘( ఈ ߲ݐߜ − ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + 0.5ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ − 16 ݐߜ ∙ ଷ ߲( ଷ ) + 124 ݐߜ ∙ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ )ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5൰ ∙ ⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎡ ߲ቀ ݐߜ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ߲− ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ቁݐߜ+ ଶ ൬1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ + 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ൰ݐߜ+ ଷ ቆ16 ߲( ଷ,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ) − 16 ߲( ଷ )ቇ ݐߜ+ ସ ቆ 124 ߲( ସ,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ) + 124 ߲( ସ )ቇ +ܱ ݐߜ( ହ )⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎤)3ܤ( 

Let ߥ = ߥ ୮୦୷ denote the physical viscosity. To quantify the discrepancy between the SLBM predictor step and that implied by the MAME, we define the difference between the corresponding predicted equilibrium momentum fluxes as ߲ ௧∗ ߲= ఉ ߎቀ ఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ߎ − ఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ெ஺ொ ቁݐߜ ܱ∝ (1) )4ܤ( 

This quantity represents the effective deviation in the temporal derivative approximation induced by the SLBM predictor step when compared with the semi-discrete MAME. This difference originates from the parameter choices inherent to the SLBM formulation, rather than from the 67 numerical discretization in space. Substituting the SLBM parameters into the generalized formulation 

ݑߩ( ఈ )ீ ௌ௅஻ெ ௌ௅஻ெ ݑߩ = )ݐ , ࢘( ఈ ߲ݐߜ − ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + 0.5ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ − 16 ݐߜ ∙ ଷ ߲( ଷ ) + 124 ݐߜ ∙ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ )ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙ ቀ߲ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ெ஺ொ ߲− ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ቁܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙ ቀߎ ఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ߎ − ఈఉ ௘௤,∗,ெ஺ொ ቁܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ ൬ ݐߜ ൰ݐߜ− 0.5 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ + 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ൰ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ ݐߜ ൰ݐߜ− 0.5 ଶ ቆ16 ߲( ଷ,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ) − 16 ߲( ଷ )ቇ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ ݐߜ ൰ݐߜ− 0.5 ଷ ቆ 124 ߲( ସ,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ) + 124 ߲( ସ )ቇ + ൬ܿ߭ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙ܱ ݐߜ( ସ ))5ܤ( 

Or written in a fully continuous form: 68 ߲௧ ݑߩ( ఈ ) ≈ ݑߩ( ఈ )( )ݐ , ࢘− (ݑߩ ఈ )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘() ݐߜ ߲− = ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ߥܿ௘௙௙ ௦߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ + ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ ߲൰ݐߜ− 0.5 ߲௧ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙߲ ௧∗ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ൬ 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ + 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ൰+ ൤− 16 ݐߜ ∙ ଶ ߲( ଷ ) + 124 ݐߜ ∙ ଷ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ସ )൨ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ ቆ ݐߜ ൰ݐߜ− 0.5 16 ߲( ଷ,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ) − 16 ߲( ଷ )ቇ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ ݐߜ ൰ݐߜ− 0.5 ଶ ቆ 124 ߲( ସ,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ) + 124 ߲( ସ )ቇ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙ܱ ݐߜ( ଷ ) ∗߲− = ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ + ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ ߲൰ݐߜ− 0.5 ߲௧ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ߥ௩௜௥௧௨௔௟ܿ ௦߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙߲ ௧∗ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ൬ 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ + 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ൰ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ ቆ ݐߜ ൰ݐߜ− 0.5 16 ߲( ଷ,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ) − 16 ߲( ଷ )ቇ ܱ+ ݐߜ( ௠ ߲, ௟ ݉| ≥ 2,݈ ≥ 3) + ൬ܿ߭ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙ܱ ݐߜ( ௠ ߲, ௟ ߲, ௟,∗ ݉| ≥ 2,݈ ≥ 4) ∗)6ܤ( 

Here, 

ୣߥ ୤୤ ߥ = ୮୦୷ ߥ + ୴୧୰୲୳ୟ୪ )7ܤ( 

denotes the effective viscosity associated with the SLBM predictor step, where 

ߥ୴୧୰୲୳ୟ୪ ܿ= ௦ଶ (1 −߬ ) ݐߜ )8ܤ( 

is the non-physical virtual viscosity introduced by the equilibrium-based predictor reconstruction of the SLBM. This virtual viscosity arises from the mismatch between the SLBM predictor parameters and those required by the MAME, and is therefore not associated with any physical dissipation mechanism. 69 By comparing the recovered momentum equation with the MAME, the truncation error terms of order ܱ  ݐߜ( ௡ ), ݊  < 2 , can be systematically classified into two categories: physical deviation terms and numerical error terms. The physical deviation terms consist of two contributions. The first one is associated with the virtual viscosity introduced by the SLBM predictor step, 

ߥ୴୧୰୲୳ୟ୪ܿ ௦ଶ ∂ఉ ∂ ఊ Π ఈఉఊୣ ୯ , )9ܤ( 

and the second one originates from the discrepancy between the SLBM predictor and the MAME-consistent predictor, 

൬ ܿߥ ௦ଶ − 12 ൰ݐߜ ∂ ௧∗ . (10ܤ) 

Both terms arise from the mismatch in the coefficient ݐଶ between the SLBM and the MAME, and therefore represent physical deviations rather than numerical discretization errors. As a result, the errors induced by these terms do not vanish with grid refinement and are intrinsic to the governing equation solved by the SLBM. In contrast, the numerical error terms consist of two distinct orders. The leading ܱ  (1) 

contribution is given by 

൬ ܿߥ ௦ଶ − 12 ቀ ൰ݐߜ 12 ∂ఉ ∂ ఊ Π ఈఉఊ (ୣ୯ ,∗,ୗ୐୆୑) + 12 ∂ఉ ∂ ఊ Π ఈఉఊୣ ୯ ቁ , (11ܤ) 

while the next-order ܱ  )ݐߜ( contribution reads 

൬ ܿߥ ௦ଶ − 12 ቀ ݐߜ ൰ݐߜ 16 ∂ (ଷ,∗,ୗ୐୆୑) − 16 ∂ ଷ ቁ . (12ܤ) 

These numerical error terms originate from the structural limitation of the generalized SLBM formulation identified in Appendix A. For clarity, the recovered momentum equation can be written in a compact form as 70 ߲௧ ݑߩ( ఈ ) ≈ ݑߩ( ఈ )( )ݐ , ࢘− (ݑߩ ఈ )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘() ݐߜ ߲− = ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ + ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ ߲൰ݐߜ− 0.5 ߲௧ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙߲ ௧∗ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ൬ 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ − 1߲2 ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ൰ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ ቆ ݐߜ ൰ݐߜ− 0.5 16 ߲( ଷ,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ) − 16 ߲( ଷ )ቇ ܿ߭൬ + ௦ଶ ݐߜ ൰ݐߜ− 0.5 ଶ ቆ 124 ߲( ସ,∗,ௌ௅஻ெ ) + 124 ߲( ସ )ቇ + ൤− 16 ݐߜ ∙ ଶ ߲( ଷ ) + 124 ݐߜ ∙ ଷ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ସ )൨ + ൬ܿ߭ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙ܱ ݐߜ( ଷ )(13ܤ) 

From the above equation, it can be observed that the virtual viscosity can be partially compensated by numerical error terms. And the resulting residual reads 

12 ∂ఉ ∂ ఊ ቀΠ ఈఉఊୣ ୯ −Π ఈఉఊ (ୣ୯ ,∗,ୗ୐୆୑) ቁ . (14ܤ) 

Since the difference can be scaled by ݑߩ( ఈ ) ∗ ݑߩ − ఈ ܱ∝ )ݐߜ( , the above residual is a ܱ  )ݐߜ( term. This provides explanation for the capability of the SLBM to approximate the flow characteristic even with physical inconsistency term. Consequently, the original SLBM can be interpreted as solving a modified momentum equation containing additional physical deviation terms and numerical error terms. Owing to the presence of both ܱ  (1) and ܱ  )ݐߜ( contributions, the global accuracy of the SLBM does not strictly satisfy second-order consistency. The second-order accuracy often observed in practice can be attributed to the fact that the correction terms are typically small [37] and therefore do not significantly degrade the overall convergence behavior. 71 

B2 Analysis for the single-step simplified lattice Boltzmann method (SS-SLBM) 

For the SS-SLBM, the corresponding coefficients are given by 

ܣ{ ௠ ߬= ܤ , ௠ = 0, ܥ ௠ ߬= − 1, ܦ ௠ = 0,ܰ ௠ = 2(߬ − 1)} ௌ௅஻ெ (15ܤ) 

which lead to the parameter set 

ݐ൜ ଴ = 1, ݐ ଵ = −1, ݐ ଶ ߬= − 12 ܿ߭= ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ݐ , ଷ = − 16 ݐ , ସ  ߬= 12 − 124 ൠௌ௅஻ெ (16ܤ) 

Since the SS-SLBM does not employ an explicit correction step, we formally assume that a set of parameters ݐ{ ଴∗ ݐ , ଵ∗ ݐ , ଶ∗ ݐ , ଷ∗ ݐ , ସ∗ } ௌௌି ௌ௅஻ெ can be introduced to recover the predictor–corrector approximation of the temporal derivative, with the additional constraint ݐ଴∗ ݐ = ଵ∗ ݐ = ∗ . With this assumption, the relation 

ܯ ௌௌି ௌ௅஻ெ ݐ ∗ ܿ߭= ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5 (17ܤ) 

is obtained. And, the reconstructed momentum at time ݐ can then be expressed as 

ݑߩ( ఈ ) ௌௌି ௌ௅஻ெ ݑߩ = )ݐ , ࢘( ఈ ߲ݐߜ − ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ܿ߭+ ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ݐߜ ߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ݐ+ ଷ ݐߜ ଷ ߲( ଷ ) + ݐ ସ ݐߜ ସ ߲( ସ ܱ+ ) ݐߜ( ହ )+ ൬ ߥܿ௘௙௙ ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 12൰ ∙ ⎝⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎛߲ቀ ݐߜ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤,∗ ߲− ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ቁݐߜ+ ଶ ݐ൬ ଶ߲∗ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤,∗ ݐ + ଴ܿ߭∗ ௦ଶ ߲ݐߜ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ ൰ݐߜ+ ଷ ൭ݐଷ∗ݐ ∗ ߲( ଷ,∗ ) − 16 ߲( ଷ )൱ ݐߜ+ ସ ൭ݐସ∗ݐ ∗ ߲( ସ,∗ ) + ൬߬ 12 − 124 ߲( ൰ ସ )൱ +ܱ ݐߜ( ହ )⎠⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎞(18ܤ) 

Consequently, the recovered momentum equation reads 72 ߲௧ ݑߩ( ఈ ) ≈ ݑߩ( ఈ )( )ݐ , ࢘− (ݑߩ ఈ )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘() ݐߜ ߲− = ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦߲ଶ ߲ఉ ఊ ߎఈఉఊ ௘௤ + ൬ ߥܿ௣௛௬ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙߲ ߲௧ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ + ߥ௩௜௥௧௨௔௟ܿ ௦ଶ ߲∙ ߲௧ ఉ ߎఈఉ ௘௤ ܱ+ ݐߜ( ௠ ߲, ௟ ݉| ≥ 2,݈ ≥ 3) + ൬ ߥܿ௘௙௙ ௦ଶ − 0.5ݐߜ൰ ∙ܱ ݐߜ( ௠ ߲, ௟ ߲, ௟,∗ ݉| ≥ 1,݈ ≥ 3) ∗(19ܤ) 

Unlike the original SLBM, the SS-SLBM introduces a virtual viscosity to the temporal derivative term, 

ߥ௩௜௥௧௨௔௟ ܿ= ௦ଶ (1 −߬ .ݐߜ) (20ܤ) 

B3 Discussion of the special case of ߬  = 1 

It is worth noting that when ߬  = 1 , all physical deviations and leading-order numerical discrepancies vanish. In this case, the coefficient associated with the temporal derivative term becomes zero at second-order accuracy, which implies that the correction step is numerically eliminated. As a result, with second-order truncation, the SLBM, the SS-SLBM, and the semi-discrete MAME recover the same macroscopic equation. Moreover, owing to the specific construction of the SLBM and SS-SLBM, their formulations reduce to a form that is formally identical to the BGK-LBM at ߬  = 1 . Specifically, 

ݑߩ( ఈ ) ௅஻ெ ( = )ݐ , ࢘෍݁ ݂௜ఈ ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ , ࢘( ௜݁෍ = ௜ఈ ݂ቆ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ݁− ௜  ݐ ,ݐߜ− ݐߜ) + ൬1 − ߬1 ݂൰ ௜௡௘௤ ࢘( ݁− ௜ ቇ)ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜݁෍ = ݂௜ఈ ௜௘௤ ࢘( ݁− ௜ )ݐߜ − ݐ ,ݐߜ ௜ݑߩ( = ఈ ) ௌ௅஻ெ ݑߩ( = )ݐ , ࢘( ఈ ) ௌௌି ௌ௅஻ெ (ݐ , ࢘) (21ܤ) 73 This observation provides additional support for the viewpoint proposed by Lu et al. , namely that the macroscopic equations recovered from the LBM inherently contain small temporal correction terms 

߲ݐߜ−0.5 ߲௧ ఉ ݑߩ൫ ఈ ݑఉ ܿߩ + ௦ଶ ߜఈఉ ൯. (22ܤ) 

Since the SLBM (also the SS-SLBM) coincides with the BGK-LBM in form at ߬  = 1 , the corresponding macroscopic equations must necessarily include the same higher-order temporal contribution. Consequently, in this special condition, the SS-SLBM, the SLBM, the MAME, and the BGK-LBM are theoretically equivalent and recover the same macroscopic equations. 

Appendix C: Derivation of the unified predictor-corrector scheme for the MAME 

If only second-order accuracy is required, the ܱ  (∂ ଶ ) term in Eq. A37 can in principle be eliminated by introducing an additional support term. Specifically, one may consider the modified reconstruction 

ݑߩ( ఈ )௡௘௪ (ݐ , ࢘) = ℎ ௠,ఈ ܰ− ௠ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ ) +  ܯ∙ ൫ℎ ௠,ఈ ∗ ݐ − ଴∗ ݑߩ ఈ ൯ − ቀℎ ௠,ఈ ௦ ܰ− ௠௦ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ )ቁ )1ܥ( 

where ℎ ௠,ఈ ௦ is associated with a set of undetermined coefficients ܣ{ ௠௦ ܤ , ௠௦ ܥ , ௠௦ ܦ , ௠௦ ܰ, ௠௦ }. These coefficients are required to satisfy a linear system ensuring the cancellation of the leading second-order temporal error, while allowing higher-order contributions characterized by free parameters 

ݐଷ௦ and ݐସ௦ .

⎩

⎪

⎪

⎪

⎨

⎪

⎪

⎪

⎧ ܣ ௠௦ ܤ + ௠௦ ܥ + ௠௦ ܦ + ௠௦ ܰ− ௠௦ = 0 ܣ− ௠௦ ܤ2 − ௠௦ ܥ + ௠௦ ܦ2 + ௠௦ = 0 12 ܣ ௠௦ ܤ2 + ௠௦ + 12 ܥ௠௦ ܦ2 + ௠௦ ܿ߭= ௦ଶ  ݐߜ ܿ߭൬ ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5൰ − 16 ܣ ௠௦ − 43 ܤ௠௦ + 16 ܥ௠௦ + 43 ܦ௠௦ ݐ = ଷ௦124 ܣ ௠௦ + 23 ܤ௠௦ + 124 ܥ௠௦ + 23 ܦ௠௦ ݐ = ସ௦)2ܥ( 74 However, even with the introduction of such a support term, the contribution involving 

ݐସ∗ ∂ (ସ,∗) cannot be eliminated. In order to simultaneously control second-order accuracy and higher-order error terms in a systematic manner, a further reformulation is required, leading to the following predictor–corrector structure: 

ݑߩ( ఈ )௨௡௜௙௜௘ௗ (ݐ , ࢘) = ℎ ௠,ఈ ܰ− ௠ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ ) +  ܯ∙ ቂℎ ௠,ఈ ∗ ܰ− ௠∗ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ ) ∗ − ቀℎ ௠,ఈ ௦ ܰ− ௠௦ ݑߩ( ∙ ఈ )ቁቃ (3ܥ) 

where ℎ ௠,ఈ , ℎ ௠,ఈ ∗ , and ℎ௠,ఈ ௦ correspond to three independent sets of coefficients 

ܣ{ ௠ ܤ , ௠ ܥ , ௠ ܦ , ௠ ܰ, ௠ }, ܣ{ ௠∗ ܤ , ௠∗ ܥ , ௠∗ ܦ , ௠∗ ܰ, ௠∗ } and ܣ{ ௠௦ ܤ , ௠௦ ܥ , ௠௦ ܦ , ௠௦ ܰ, ௠௦ }, respectively. Here, 

ܿ߭= ܯ ௦ଶ  ݐߜ − 0.5 )4ܥ( 

and the parameters ܣ{ ௠ ܤ , ௠ ܥ , ௠ ܦ , ௠ ܰ, ௠ } associated with the predictor step are constrained by the physical requirements of the MAME as in Appendix A. The remaining coefficients are determined by solving the corresponding linear systems: 

⎩

⎪

⎪

⎨

⎪

⎪

⎧ ܣ ௠∗ ܤ + ௠∗ ܥ + ௠∗ ܦ + ௠∗ ܰ− ௠∗ = 0 ܣ− ௠∗ ܤ2 − ௠∗ ܥ + ௠∗ ܦ2 + ௠∗ = 1 12 ܣ ௠∗ ܤ2 + ௠∗ + 12 ܥ௠∗ ܦ2 + ௠∗ = 0 − 16 ܣ ௠∗ − 43 ܤ௠∗ + 16 ܥ௠∗ + 43 ܦ௠∗ ݐ = ଷ∗124 ܣ ௠∗ + 23 ܤ௠∗ + 124 ܥ௠∗ + 23 ܦ௠∗ ݐ = ସ∗)5ܥ( 

and 

⎩

⎪

⎪

⎨

⎪

⎪

⎧ ܣ ௠௦ ܤ + ௠௦ ܥ + ௠௦ ܦ + ௠௦ ܰ− ௠௦ = 0 ܣ− ௠௦ ܤ2 − ௠௦ ܥ + ௠௦ ܦ2 + ௠௦ = 1 12 ܣ ௠௦ ܤ2 + ௠௦ + 12 ܥ௠௦ ܦ2 + ௠௦ = 0 − 16 ܣ ௠௦ − 43 ܤ௠௦ + 16 ܥ௠௦ + 43 ܦ௠௦ ݐ = ଷ௦124 ܣ ௠௦ + 23 ܤ௠௦ + 124 ܥ௠௦ + 23 ܦ௠௦ ݐ = ସ௦)6ܥ( 75 Once the higher-order free parameters ݐ{ ଷ ݐ , ସ ݐ , ଷ∗ ݐ , ସ∗ ݐ , ଷ௦ ݐ , ସ௦ } are specified. With this construction, all coefficients are uniquely fixed and the resulting numerical scheme is fully determined. The modified formulation introduces alternative combinations of higher-order terms, whose relative contributions are governed by the chosen parameters. Detailed derivations are omitted here, as they do not affect the key conclusions of the present work. It should be emphasized that an accurate implementation of the corrector step within this unified predictor–corrector formulation entails a substantial increase in computational cost and algorithmic complexity. For the sake of numerical efficiency and clarity, the present study restricts this formulation to theoretical analysis, while finite-difference discretization is employed in the numerical experiments. Finally, this scheme may be interpreted as a general second-order accurate predictor– corrector approach applicable to a class of macroscopic equations characterized by different parametric sets ݐ{ ௡ ݐ , ௡∗ ݊| ≤ 2} . Among these, only the MAME corresponds to a physically consistent macroscopic equation, as its derivation is firmly rooted in the underlying BGK lattice Boltzmann equation. 

## References 

[1] G.R. McNamara, G. Zanetti, Use of the Boltzmann Equation to Simulate Lattice-Gas Automata, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61 (1988) 2332–2335. [2] Y.H. Qian, D. D’Humières, P. Lallemand, Lattice BGK Models for Navier-Stokes Equation, Europhys. Lett. 17 (1992) 479–484. [3] X. Shan, X.-F. Yuan, H. Chen, Kinetic theory representation of hydrodynamics: a way beyond the Navier–Stokes equation, J. Fluid Mech. 550 (2006) 413. [4] Z. Guo, B. Shi, C. Zheng, A coupled lattice BGK model for the Boussinesq equations, Numerical Methods in Fluids 39 (2002) 325–342. 76 [5] Z. Zhang, X. Wang, Improving leading edge cooling through transpiration with partitioned porous injectors and a jet, Applied Thermal Engineering 238 (2024) 121987. [6] Q. Li, K.H. Luo, Q.J. Kang, Y.L. He, Q. Chen, Q. Liu, Lattice Boltzmann methods for multiphase flow and phase-change heat transfer, Progress in Energy and Combustion Science 52 (2016) 62–105. [7] H. Hu, H. Huang, Modeling symmetric and asymmetric hysteresis modes in patterned microchannels: A unified framework for classification and prediction, Physics of Fluids 37 (2025) 093364. [8] K. Kusano, H. Yamaguchi, Adjoint-based shape optimization using lattice Boltzmann method for flow and sound control in tandem cylinders, Journal of Fluids and Structures 135 (2025) 104308. [9] P. Lallemand, L.-S. Luo, Theory of the lattice Boltzmann method: Dispersion, dissipation, isotropy, Galilean invariance, and stability, Phys. Rev. E 61 (2000) 6546–6562. [10] I.V. Karlin, A.N. Gorban, S. Succi, V. Boffi, Maximum Entropy Principle for Lattice Kinetic Equations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 6–9. [11] Z. Chen, C. Shu, Simplified and Highly Stable Lattice Boltzmann Method: Theory and Applications, WORLD SCIENTIFIC, 2020. [12] Z. Chen, C. Shu, D. Tan, C. Wu, On improvements of simplified and highly stable lattice Boltzmann method: Formulations, boundary treatment, and stability analysis, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids 87 (2018) 161–179. [13] Z. Chen, C. Shu, D. Tan, Three-dimensional simplified and unconditionally stable lattice Boltzmann method for incompressible isothermal and thermal flows, Phys Fluids 29 (2017) 053601. [14] Z. Chen, C. Shu, D. Tan, A simplified thermal lattice Boltzmann method without evolution of distribution functions, Int J Heat Mass Tran 105 (2017) 741–757. [15] Z. Chen, C. Shu, D. Tan, A Truly Second-Order and Unconditionally Stable Thermal Lattice Boltzmann Method, Applied Sciences 7 (2017) 277. [16] Z. Chen, C. Shu, D. Tan, X.D. Niu, Q.Z. Li, Simplified multiphase lattice Boltzmann method for simulating multiphase flows with large density ratios and complex interfaces, Phys. Rev. E 98 (2018) 063314. 77 [17] Z. Chen, C. Shu, L.M. Yang, X. Zhao, N.Y. Liu, Phase-field-simplified lattice Boltzmann method for modeling solid-liquid phase change, Phys. Rev. E 103 (2021) 023308. [18] Z. Chen, C. Shu, Simplified lattice Boltzmann method for non‐Newtonian power‐law fluid flows, Numerical Methods in Fluids 92 (2020) 38–54. [19] Z. Chen, C. Shu, D.S. Tan, The Simplified Lattice Boltzmann Method on Non-Uniform Meshes, Commun Comput Phys 23 (2018) 1131–1149. [20] Z. Chen, C. Shu, D. Tan, Immersed boundary-simplified lattice Boltzmann method for incompressible viscous flows, Phys Fluids 30 (2018) 053601. [21] A. De Rosis, J. Al-Adham, H. Al-Ali, R. Meng, Double-D2Q9 lattice Boltzmann models with extended equilibrium for two-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic flows, Physics of Fluids 33 (2021) 035143. [22] A. Khan, X.-D. Niu, Q.-Z. Li, Y. Li, D. Li, H. Yamaguchi, Dynamic study of ferrodroplet and bubbles merging in ferrofluid by a simplified multiphase lattice Boltzmann method, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 495 (2020) 165869. [23] Y. Ma, Z. Yang, Simplified and highly stable thermal Lattice Boltzmann method simulation of hybrid nanofluid thermal convection at high Rayleigh numbers, Physics of Fluids 32 (2020) 012009. [24] A. Delgado‐Gutiérrez, P. Marzocca, D. Cárdenas, O. Probst, A highly accurate GPU Lattice Boltzmann method with directional interpolation for the probability distribution functions, Numerical Methods in Fluids 92 (2020) 1778–1797. [25] R. Dai, W. Li, J. Mostaghimi, Q. Wang, M. Zeng, On the optimal heat source location of partially heated energy storage process using the newly developed simplified enthalpy based lattice Boltzmann method, Applied Energy 275 (2020) 115387. [26] R. Dai, X. Lu, X. Tong, J. Deng, Thermal performance analysis of different T-shaped fin configurations on thermal energy storage through simplified enthalpy based lattice Boltzmann method, Case Studies in Thermal Engineering 53 (2024) 103861. [27] Y. Gao, L. Yang, Y. Yu, G. Hou, Z. Hou, Improved simplified and highly stable lattice Boltzmann methods for incompressible flows, Int J Mod Phys C 32 (2021) 2150077. [28] A. Delgado-Gutiérrez, P. Marzocca, D. Cárdenas, O. Probst, A single-step and simplified graphics processing unit lattice Boltzmann method for high turbulent flows, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids 93 (2021) 2339–2361. 78 [29] A. De Rosis, R. Liu, A. Revell, One-stage simplified lattice Boltzmann method for two- and three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic flows, Physics of Fluids 33 (2021) 085114. [30] S. Qin, L. Yang, G. Hou, Y. Gao, W. Guo, A one‐step simplified lattice Boltzmann method without evolution of distribution functions, Numerical Methods in Fluids 94 (2022) 1001– 1025. [31] S. Qin, G. Hou, L. Yang, X. Liu, H. Luo, One-step simplified lattice Boltzmann method of thermal flows under the Boussinesq approximation, Phys. Rev. E 108 (2023) 045305. [32] S. Qin, G. Hou, L. Yang, Y. Gao, W. Guo, J. Shi, A novel one-step simplified lattice Boltzmann method and its application to multiphase flows with large density ratio, Physics of Fluids (2023) 053318. [33] Z.W. He, C. Shu, Z. Chen, A comparative study of the simplified thermal lattice Boltzmann method with different lattice velocity models, Physics of Fluids 37 (2025) 113601. [34] L. Jiang, X. Gu, J. Wu, A Simplified Lattice Boltzmann Method for Turbulent Flow Simulation, AAMM 14 (2022) 1040–1058. [35] Z.-W. He, C. Shu, Z. Chen, Simplified lattice Boltzmann method on multi-resolution mesh, Physics of Fluids 36 (2024) 087171. [36] Z. Chen, C. Shu, D. Tan, Highly accurate simplified lattice Boltzmann method, Phys Fluids 30 (2018) 103605. [37] Z. Chen, C. Shu, On numerical diffusion of simplified lattice Boltzmann method, Numerical Methods in Fluids 92 (2020) 1198–1211. [38] Y.G. Yuan Gao, L.Y. Liuming Yang, Y.Y. Yang Yu, G.H. Guoxiang Hou, Z.H. Zhongbao Hou, Consistent Forcing Scheme in the Simplified Lattice Boltzmann Method for Incompressible Flows, CICP 30 (2021) 1427–1452. [39] Z. Guo, C. Zheng, B. Shi, Discrete lattice effects on the forcing term in the lattice Boltzmann method, Phys. Rev. E 65 (2002) 046308 [40] Y. Gao, Y. Yu, L. Yang, S. Qin, G. Hou, Development of a coupled simplified lattice Boltzmann method for thermal flows, Computers & Fluids 229 (2021) 105042. [41] Q.-Z. Li, Z.-L. Lu, Z. Chen, C. Shu, Y.-Y. Liu, T.-Q. Guo, Z.-L. Zhang, An efficient simplified phase-field lattice Boltzmann method for super-large-density-ratio multiphase flow, International Journal of Multiphase Flow 160 (2023) 104368. 79 [42] J. Lu, C. Dai, P. Yu, Analysis and reconstruction of the revised formulations of the simplified and highly stable lattice Boltzmann method, Physics of Fluids 33 (2021) 107120. [43] J. Lu, H. Lei, C. Shu, C. Dai, The more actual macroscopic equations recovered from lattice Boltzmann equation and their applications, Journal of Computational Physics 415 (2020) 109546. [44] T. Krüger, H. Kusumaatmaja, A. Kuzmin, O. Shardt, G. Silva, E.M. Viggen, The Lattice Boltzmann Method: Principles and Practice, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2017. [45] M.L. Minion, D.L. Brown, Performance of Under-resolved Two-Dimensional Incompressible Flow Simulations, II, Journal of Computational Physics 138 (1997) 734–765. [46] C. Coreixas, J. Latt, GPU-based compressible lattice Boltzmann simulations on non-uniform grids using standard C++ parallelism: From best practices to aerodynamics, aeroacoustics and supersonic flow simulations, Computer Physics Communications 317 (2025) 109833. [47] C. Coreixas, G. Wissocq, G. Puigt, J.F. Boussuge, P. Sagaut, Recursive regularization step for high-order lattice Boltzmann methods, Phys. Rev. E 96 (2017) 033306. [48] A. Krämer, K. Küllmer, D. Reith, W. Joppich, H. Foysi, Semi-Lagrangian off-lattice Boltzmann method for weakly compressible flows, Phys. Rev. E 95 (2017) 023305. [49] U. Ghia, K.N. Ghia, C.T. Shin, High-Re solutions for incompressible flow using the Navier-Stokes equations and a multigrid method, Journal of Computational Physics 48 (1982) 387– 411.