Title: An Architecture-Agnostic High-Order Discontinuous Galerkin Framework for Compressible Flows

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.28627v1

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 01:44:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# An Architecture-Agnostic High-Order Discontinuous Galerkin Framework for Compressible Flows 

Spencer Starr a, ∗, Yannik Feldner a, Patrick Kopper a, Marcel Blind a, Daniel Kempf a, Jannik Schrempp a, Felix Rodach a,Andrea Beck a, Anna Schwarz a

> aInstitute of Aerodynamics and Gas Dynamics, University of Stuttgart, Wankelstraße 3, 70563 Stuttgart, Germany

Abstract With the recent proliferation of heterogeneous, GPU-accelerated supercomputers, high-order computational fluid dy-namics (CFD) simulations of complex, turbulent flows are more accessible than ever. To leverage the computing power of these machines, CFD software must adapt. However, complicating the situation is the emerging need to support hardware from multiple GPU vendors. Addressing this need is the GPU-accelerated, discontinuous Galerkin spectral element method (DGSEM) framework GALÆXI, a high-order, open source, architecture-agnostic toolchain for the study of complex, compressible, turbulent flows on unstructured, hexahedral grids. GPU-accelerated computations with GA-LÆXI are possible on GPU hardware by interfacing Fortran source code to the vendor models CUDA C++ for NVIDIA and HIP C++ for AMD. The DGSEM implementation in GALÆXI was verified using the method of manufactured solutions to rigorously confirm the expected order of convergence. Simulations of a compressible Taylor-Green-Vortex also demonstrated ex-cellent agreement with reference solutions across all supported architectures. GALÆXI achieved near ideal strong and weak scaling on GPU hardware from both NVIDIA and AMD. In the largest case, GALÆXI performed a simulation with 67.1 billion degrees of freedom on 65 536 AMD MI250X graphics compute devices with a parallel efficiency of 82.6%. Comparing node-to-node performance, GPU simulations offered speedups between 7.75x and 8.08x over CPU computations in time-to-solution while consuming less than half the energy. To demonstrate GALÆXI’s effectiveness for production-scale simulations, wall-resolved large eddy simulations of the transonic flow past a NACA 64A-110 airfoil and an ONERA OAT15A airfoil under shock buffet conditions were computed. Keywords: Discontinuous Galerkin, Portability, Fortran, GPUs, Turbulence, Compressible Flow 1. Introduction In the ever-evolving landscape of computational fluid dynamics (CFD), there is a constant push toward larger and more complex problems. One discipline of CFD where this is especially true is the study of three-dimensional, compressible, turbulent flows. This regime contains large disparities in temporal and physical scales along with elab-orate interactions between turbulent structures and other flows features like shock waves. The situation is compli-cated even further when such flows involve complex, de-tailed geometries, which is often the case in applications such as supercritical wing aerodynamics or turbomachin-ery. State-of-the-art research in this area frequently uses approaches such as direct numerical simulation (DNS) or large-eddy simulation (LES) which, for complex geome-tries, typically require high-order numerical approxima-tions and high-fidelity, unstructured meshes. Such simu-

> ∗Corresponding author Email address: spencer.starr@iag.uni-stuttgart.de (Spencer Starr)

lations demand a significant computational cost, requir-ing the use of supercomputers for their calculation to be possible. Since the beginning of high performance com-puting (HPC), computational capacity of supercomputers has steadily increased over time, accommodating studies of turbulent flow fields of simultaneously increasing fidelity and complexity. Currently, the largest computers in the world are ca-pable of performing more than 10 18 floating point opera-tions per second (FLOPs) [1], or one exaFLOP. To achieve those groundbreaking computational capacities, hardware manufacturers have turned to specialized computer chips, generally named accelerators, that offer greater comput-ing capability over traditional CPUs. The most popular type of accelerator is the graphics processing unit (GPU), whose hardware is specifically suited for the rendering of computer graphics. In the last decade, their use in general HPC applications has increased significantly. While the number of supercomputers featuring GPUs has risen, the number of manufacturers in the market has also risen. Looking back five years, of the 12 GPU ac-celerated systems in the top 25, every one used NVIDIA 1

> arXiv:2605.28627v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 27 May 2026

GPUs [2]. Now, only four of the systems in the top ten of the current Top500 [1] utilize GPUs from NVIDIA, while a further four feature AMD GPUs and a ninth system uses GPUs from Intel. For CFD software developers, support-ing computations on GPU hardware from multiple vendors is quickly becoming a requirement. Due to competing, manufacturer-specific programming models for GPUs, this requirement presents a significant roadblock to producing CFD software that can leverage all current HPC systems. Several software frameworks have emerged that over-come the portability barrier and enable architecture-agnostic solutions for complex flow simulations. Table 1 summa-rizes state-of-the-art, architecture-agnostic software frame-works designed for high-order accurate simulations of three-dimensional, compressible flows on unstructured grids. SOD2D [3] is a Fortran-based solver which uses OpenACC for multi-vendor support. It leverages a spectral element method (SEM) and offers an entropy viscosity stabilization ap-proach to maintain robustness in the presence of discon-tinuities. To date, performance of SOD2D has been re-ported on up to 64 GPUs [5]. In contrast, PyFR [4] is a Python-based framework centered on the flux reconstruc-tion (FR) method in tandem with an entropy-based adap-tive filtering approach for a-posteriori shock capturing [6]. By leveraging Mako templates [7] to abstract GPU kernels in a vendor-agnostic way, PyFR achieves broad backend compatibility, including NVIDIA, AMD, Intel, and Ap-ple Metal hardware and has demonstrated parallel perfor-mance up to 2048 GPUs. While these frameworks offer robust solutions for tur-bulent, compressible flows, certain limitations currently re-strict their broader applicability. A primary concern is the lack of proven performance at the largest computing scales. High-fidelity DNS and LES of turbulent flows at realistic Reynolds numbers often demand resolutions ex-ceeding tens of billions of degrees of freedom (DOFs) [8, 9]. Executing such simulations necessitates proven scalability not merely on thousands of GPUs, but on the order of tens of thousands. Furthermore, the numerical fidelity and scalability of these solvers are significantly impacted by their respective numerical treatments of discontinuities. The entropy fil-tering approach in PyFR relies on a computationally de-manding a posteriori sub-iteration process to adaptively determine the filter strength by enforcing positivity and local discrete minimum entropy principles [6]. This shares a fundamental limitation with artificial viscosity schemes: the inherent difficulty in retaining sub-cell resolution [10]. This often results in overly dissipative behavior that smears the solution, thereby degrading the high-order accuracy not just at the discontinuity, but in the smooth flow re-gions immediately surrounding the shock front. This is particularly crucial for more complex flow scenarios such as shock-turbulence interactions, where capturing the fine-scale amplification of eddies across a shock requires avoid-ing the overly dissipative behavior inherent to artificial viscosity or filter-based shock capturing approaches. Finally, the specific architecture-agnostic strategies employed by these frameworks present hurdles for broader adoption and cross-platform transferability. OpenACC re-stricts SOD2D’s effective portability to systems equipped with NVIDIA and AMD GPUs [11], leaving a gap for other emerging hardware architectures. PyFR’s reliance on a Python-centric stack is a distinct departure from the high-order CFD landscape, which is predominantly built upon the Fortran [12, 13, 14, 15, 16] or C++ [17] programming languages. Consequently, the specialized porting mecha-nisms developed for PyFR are not easily transferable to the majority of existing production codes, complicating the exchange of optimized kernels and limiting the wider impact of its portability breakthroughs. To address the dual challenges of extreme scalability and hardware-agnostic portability without sacrificing high-order accuracy in the vicinity of discontinuities, this work introduces the final entry in Table 1, GALÆXI. This frame-work is built upon three core pillars: • Broad and Transferable Portability: GALÆXI achieves portability by interfacing an existing Fortran code base to the C++ variants of the programming mod-els CUDA [18] for NVIDIA GPUs and HIP [19] for AMD GPUs, providing a template for porting other Fortran-based computational software. This approach ensures immediate performance on NVIDIA and AMD hardware while remaining extensible to other ven-dors and hardware. • Scalability: Leveraging the excellent parallelization properties of the discontinuous Galerkin spectral el-ement method (DGSEM) — which has demonstrated scal-ability to over 500 000 CPU cores [20] — this work extends that efficiency to the GPU domain. This targets the deployment on tens of thousands of accel-erators required for next-generation DNS and LES, moving beyond the proof-of-concept performance demon-strated in initial GPU porting attempts [21]. • High-Fidelity: Unlike artificial viscosity or filter-based shock capturing approaches, GALÆXI utilizes a more accurate shock capturing based on the switching of troubled DG cells to an equidistant finite volume (FV) sub-cell operator [22]. This allows for robust handling of discontinuities and, combined with the DGSEM, strictly preserves high-order accuracy and sub-element resolution in the surrounding turbulent flow. By unifying these three aspects, GALÆXI provides a high-performance pathway for the high-fidelity simula-tion of complex, compressible flows at previously inacces-sible scales. GALÆXI is derived from the open-source solver FLEXI [15], a mature codebase thoroughly vali-dated across a diverse range of fluid dynamics applica-2Table 1: Comparison of multi-architecture CFD solvers intended for high-order solutions of three-dimensional, compressible flows on unstruc-tured grids. Software Numerical Method Shock Capturing Programming Language Porting Approach Supported GPU Vendors 

SOD2D [3] SEM Entropy Viscosity Stabilization Fortran OpenACC NVIDIA, AMD PyFR [4] FR Entropy Filtering Python Mako templates / code generation NVIDIA, AMD, Intel, Apple Metal GALÆXI DGSEM FV sub-cell Fortran C++ vendor mod-els (CUDA, HIP) NVIDIA, AMD tions [23, 24, 25]. From this foundation, GALÆXI inher-its a robust suite of high-order numerical algorithms. This work focuses its core advancements on elevating the ca-pabilities of those algorithms to achieve performance and architecture-agnostic portability for complex, compress-ible flow simulations. The discussions that follow are organized thus. The next section provides a review of architecture-agnostic GPU porting approaches for Fortran-based computational physics software. Section 3 then describes the governing equations and numerics scheme of GALÆXI before elaborating on the implemented approach for architecture-agnostic com-puting. The validation of the implementation is presented in Section 4. The performance of GALÆXI is highlighted in Section 5, with aspects such as the scaling performance, time- and energy-to-solution discussed. Finally, in Sec-tion 6, GALÆXI is used to compute a wall-resolved LES (WRLES) of two transonic airfoil configurations to demon-strate its performance for representative use cases. Sec-tion 7 then provides a summary and conclusion. 2. Architecture-agnostic Acceleration Approaches for For-tran Software While Fortran has not been a mainstream program-ming language for many decades, it is still highly preva-lent in the computational sciences and HPC [33]. As was highlighted in Section 1, that includes many high-order CFD software frameworks. In the current age of heteroge-nous computing environments, the process of selecting a portable GPU porting strategy can be a difficult task for Fortran-based CFD codes. While there are many resources available to guide developers in making this impactful de-cision, there are no objective rules on which will be best for a given piece of software. Each software must individually select an approach based on their own requirements. The task is complicated by the fact there are rarely opportuni-ties to reconsider the choice of approach once developers have committed to it. In Table 2, a selection of the possi-ble portable programming models available to developers of Fortran scientific software is presented. Attractive options in this category are the directive-based models OpenMP [26] and OpenACC [27], which use code decorators called directives to build structured blocks of code called constructs that can execute on the CPU or GPU. While directives can be a non-intrusive way to port Fortran codes to GPUs, algorithms may still demand ex-tensive code refactors to account for the multi-threaded nature of GPUs [34]. Both OpenMP and OpenACC are Fortran-native, foregoing any need to rewrite portions of the code base in another programming language to support certain hardware or vendors. OpenMP supports offloading to GPUs from NVIDIA, AMD and Intel while OpenACC supports GPU hardware from NVIDIA and AMD [11]. The main drawbacks of directive models is their lack of fine-grain control over performance and their heavy re-liance on compiler support for performance and portabil-ity. In a review of OpenMP porting efforts [34], codes from many scientific disciplines found performant results, though some struggled with OpenMP’s feature support across compilers and control over GPU memory. Looking specifically at CFD software packages, several have used directive models to port their codes. SOD2D [3] uses OpenACC and can compute on CPU-based systems and can also offload to NVIDIA and AMD GPUs. STREAmS-2 [35, 36] is a high-order finite difference (FD) solver which supports Intel, AMD and NVIDIA GPUs while retain-ing CPU support and has been demonstrated on simu-lations featuring more than 2000 GPUs. The developers of STREAmS-2 used a mixture of CUDA Fortran [32], OpenMP and a bespoke source-to-source (S2S) translation tool to achieve this. Another solver is URANOS [13, 37], which supports computations on CPUs and GPU hard-ware from NVIDIA and AMD using OpenACC. Another option to provide maximum portability are a class of methods called abstraction frameworks. Exam-ples of such frameworks include Kokkos [28], RAJA [29] and ALPAKA [30]. All of these frameworks offer some level of vendor-agnostic abstraction, allowing GPU code to be written generally then the individual architectures are handled behind the scenes by the framework. The biggest drawback of these libraries, however, is their either cursory or non-existent Fortran support. The final option is using the vendor models offered by each GPU hardware manufacturer. Examples of these 3Table 2: Selection of available programming models for the architecture-agnostic GPU porting of Fortran-based scientific software Programming Model Native Fortran Support Supported Vendors / Architectures Level of Abstraction 

OpenMP [26] YES CPU, NVIDIA, AMD, IN-TEL Directives OpenACC [27] YES CPU, NVIDIA, AMD Directives Kokkos [28] NO CPU, NVIDIA, AMD, IN-TEL Framework RAJA [29] NO CPU, NVIDIA, AMD, IN-TEL Framework ALPAKA [30] NO CPU, NVIDIA, AMD Framework Vendor models (CUDA [18],HIP [19], SYCL [31]) Mixed a Mixed b None 

> aEach vendor’s model natively supports that vendor’s hardware. HIP also supports NVIDIA GPUs [19], and SYCL supports all vendors [11].
> bCUDA natively supports Fortran with CUDA Fortran [32]. HIP and SYCL only natively support C/C++.

models include CUDA [18] for NVIDIA GPUs, HIP [19] for AMD and SYCL [31] for Intel. HIP also boasts support for NVIDIA GPUs [19] and use of SYCL for both AMD and NVIDIA GPUs is possible through the AdaptiveCpp project [38]. NVIDIA’s CUDA offers full support for GPU kernel code in Fortran [32]. The limitation here is that AMD and Intel do not offer this same support, with their models only available for use in C or C++ software [11]. From a performance perspective, vendor models allow de-velopers to interact directly with the accelerator hardware with little to no abstraction, providing the highest degree of control. When compared in the context of a high-order DG code, OpenMP and Kokkos were slower than CUDA on NVIDIA GPUs [39]. The authors of Bauman et al. [40] concluded that the largest performance benefits were seen when scientific codes used vendor models for porting. If either the abstraction frameworks or vendor models are chosen, all compute methods would have to be rewrit-ten in C/C++ in order to support all GPU vendors. Both NEKO [14] and FUN3D [41] are examples of Fortran CFD codes that leverage vendor models through Fortran-to-C interfaces in a performant and portable way. NEKO is a GPU-accelerated version of the well-known CFD soft-ware Nek5000 [12]. It utilizes a SEM, but is limited to the incompressible regime on structured grids. NEKO lever-ages modern, object-oriented Fortran to create a class hi-erarchy where backends for multiple vendors can be im-plemented as instances of solver classes. Through that approach, NEKO features support for CPUs and GPUs from NVIDIA, AMD and Intel and has been shown to scale up to 512 GPUs [42]. The finite volume software package FUN3D [43] uses interfaces to the C++ vendor models CUDA [18], HIP [19] and SYCL [31], which are contained in an external library called FLUDA. With this approach, FUN3D has been scaled to thousands of GPUs from multiple vendors [41, 44]. After weighing the benefits and considering the above-enumerated examples of each programming model, the approach using Fortran-C interfaces to the C++ ven-dor models was chosen for GALÆXI. This is due to the available fine-grain control of performance, success of the approach in similar software packages and a proven record of scaling on the largest supercomputers in the world. 3. Implementation In the following section, brief coverage of the DGSEM method is provided. That is followed by a detailed de-scription of GALÆXI’s strategy for interfacing an existing Fortran implementation of the DGSEM to the C++ ven-dor models including coverage on memory management and parallelization strategies. We introduce these numer-ical and implementation aspects to provide the necessary context for the performance benchmarks and physical val-idations that follow. 3.1. Governing Equations and Numerical Method A compressible, viscous fluid governed by the Navier–Stokes–Fourier equations is considered, given as: 

(q)t + ∇ · F(q, ∇q) = 0, (1) 

F = [ρu, ρ u ⊗ u + pI − τ, (ρe + p)u − τ · u − λ∇T ]> ,

where q = [ρ, ρ u, ρ e]>, is the vector of conserved vari-ables, consisting of the density ρ, the velocity vector u,and the total energy e per unit mass. The unit tensor is denoted by I, T is the temperature, λ the thermal conduc-tivity, p the pressure, F the physical flux, and the viscous stress tensor τ for a Newtonian fluid. The heat flux is modeled in accordance with Fourier’s law. The equations 4are closed by the caloric and thermal equations of state of a perfect gas, given as p = ρ(1 − γ)ϵ and p = ρRT with the specific gas constant R of ambient air and the internal energy ϵ per unit mass. Following the method of lines approach, the conserva-tion equations are discretized in space by the DGSEM. The computational domain Ω ⊆ R3 is discretized by non-overlapping, (non-) conforming hexahedral elements with six possibly curvilinear element faces. Subsequently, the considered governing equations are mapped onto the ref-erence space E = [−1, 1] 3 via the mapping χ : ξ ∈ E 7 →

x ∈ Ω. The Jacobian matrix of this mapping is J =(∇ξχ) ∈ R3×3 with J = det J as the corresponding determi-nant. The element-local solution q is approximated by a polynomial representation using the tensor-product of one-dimensional nodal Lagrange basis functions ℓ of degree N,The weak form is retrieved by a discrete L2 projection of the resulting equations onto the test space composed of polynomials ϕ(ξ) up to degree N, chosen similarly to the basis functions (Galerkin approach) and followed by an application of Gauss’ theorem, yielding 

∫

> E

Jqtϕ(ξ) dξ+

∫

> ∂E

(F · ˆn)∗ϕ(ξ) dS (2) 

−

∫

> E

F (q, ∇q) · ∇ ξϕ(ξ) dξ = 0,

where ˆn is the unit normal vector in E, and F are the contravariant fluxes. Neighboring elements are weakly coupled via the numerical flux (F · ˆn)∗ normal to the el-ement faces, here approximated by Roe’s numerical flux with the entropy fix by [45] and the viscous fluxes are sim-ply averaged. The collocation property is exploited for the numerical integration of Eq. (2) by the use of (N + 1) 3

Legendre–Gauss–Lobatto or Legendre–Gauss quadrature points as interpolation nodes for q.To calculate the viscous fluxes, the Navier–Stokes–Fourier equations require the gradients of the primitive variables, 

∇qprim . In this work, the BR1 lifting scheme [46] is applied to approximate these gradients. This approach involves solving an auxiliary set of equations; after applying the DGSEM, the resulting semi-discrete form is written as 

∫

> E

Jgϕ(ξ) dξ −

∫

> ∂E

{{qprim · ˆn}}ϕ(ξ) dS (3) 

+

∫

> E

qprim · ∇ ξϕ(ξ) dξ = 0,

with the lifted gradients g = ∇xqprim and the averaging operator at the element faces {{·} }i j = [( ·)i + (·) j]/2.In this work, the entropy-stable DGSEM with the en-tropy conservative fluxes of [47] is utilized to alleviate nu-merical stability issues and mitigate aliasing errors due to the approximation of the nonlinear (convective) flux. The shock capturing procedure is based on a 2nd-order accurate finite volume (FV) sub-cell scheme with (N + 1) 3

integral means per DG element [48] using a modal indica-tor [49] for the detection of troubled DG cells. The solu-tion is advanced in time by an explicit low-storage Runge– Kutta fourth-order accurate scheme with five stages (RK4-5) [50] or 14 stages (RK4-14) [51]. If not stated otherwise, in this work a CFL (Courant, Friedrichs and Lewy) number of CFL = 0.9 is set, the same applies to the viscous time step restriction. The reader is referred to [48, 15, 52] for further details on the entropy-stable DGSEM, the FV sub-cell based shock capturing procedure, and applications. 3.2. Porting Strategy GALÆXI inherits the Fortran core of its code base from the CPU-only DGSEM framework FLEXI [15]. To sup-port multiple vendors of GPU hardware, the Fortran code interfaces to compute kernels written in the C++ vari-ants of the vendor models. To conquer the limitations of Fortran-to-C interoperability as well as the limitations of the boundary between CPU and GPU, the programming language barrier is placed at the hardware barrier. This results in a software design in GALÆXI where all Fortran code executes on the CPU and all C/C++ code either ex-ecutes on the GPU or mutates the GPU’s state through kernel launches or vendor model API calls. Owing to the similarities between CUDA C++ and HIP C++, the same kernel code can be reused for both CUDA and HIP, with the small differences between the two vendor models hidden behind a thin abstraction layer using pre-processor macros. New methods named entry points branch between the different backends of a com-pute kernel at runtime. An example of such an entry point method is found in Listing 1. Beyond their primary pur-pose of splitting between different hardware backends, the entry point methods can also perform operations that are shared between CPU and GPU backends. For computations on CPUs, the original Fortran com-pute method from FLEXI is called. When the GPU back-ends are active, the call to DeviceBackend in Listing 1 routes through a standard Fortran-C interface [53] and into a method called the kernel launcher, an example of which is shown in Listing 2. The INVOKE_KERNEL macro in Listing 2 hides the vendor-specific kernel launch syntax. 3.2.1. Memory Management A major design challenge with the chosen approach was how to manage GPU memory. With all initialization routines remaining in Fortran, the instructions to mutate GPU memory (i.e. allocate, free or copy to/from the CPU) must be issued from Fortran. While CUDA and HIP sup-ply Fortran wrappers for their memory APIs, this would limit flexibility, as some models, such as SYCL, do not have Fortran wrappers. The approach seen in Listing 3 is used, which keeps all backend-specific API calls in C++. 5SUBROUTINE EntryPoint(nTotal,VecOut,d_Out,Const) USE ISO_C_BINDING, ONLY: C_PTR IMPLICIT NONE ! INPUT/OUTPUT VARIABLES !< memory size length INTEGER,INTENT(IN) :: nTotal !< host memory REAL(KIND=8),INTENT(INOUT) :: VecOut(nTotal) !< device memory TYPE(C_PTR),INTENT(IN) :: d_Out !< constant REAL(KIND=8),INTENT(IN) :: Const #if (USE_ACCEL == ACCEL_OFF) CALL HostBackend(nTotal,VecOut,Const) #else CALL DeviceBackend(nTotal,d_Out,Const) #endif END SUBROUTINE EntryPoint 

> Listing 1: Fortran entry-point method to split between architecture backends in GALÆXI. Note the use of a pre-processor flag to decide which backend will be invoked at compile time.

#if (USE_ACCEL == ACCEL_CUDA) #define INVOKE_KERNEL(fun,blcks,thrds,shrd,strm,...)\ fun<<<blcks,thrds,shrd,strm>>>(__VA_ARGS__) #elif (USE_ACCEL == ACCEL_HIP) // Define AMD kernel launch syntax #endif /* USE_ACCEL */ void DeviceBackend(int nTotal,void* d_VecOut,double Const ){INVOKE_KERNEL(KernelFunc, nTotal/256+1,256,0,0, nTotal, (double*)d_VecOut, Const ); } 

> Listing 2: Example of a kernel launcher method in GALÆXI. The

INVOKE_KERNEL macro hides the vendor-specific kernel launch syntax. 

ALLOCATE( HostArr(arrSize) ) d_DevPtr = AllocateMemDevice(SIZE_DBLE,arrSize) CALL CopyToDevice(d_DevPtr,HostArr,SIZE_DBLE, arrSize) void* AllocateMemDevice( size_t typeSize_bytes, int arraySize ){void* d_arr; #if (USE_ACCEL == ACCEL_CUDA) cudaMalloc(&d_arr, typeSize_bytes*arraySize); #elif (USE_ACCEL == ACCEL_HIP) hipMalloc( &d_arr, typeSize_bytes*arraySize); #endif /* USE_ACCEL */ return d_arr; }void CopyToDevice( void* dVarPtr,void* hostMemory, size_t typeSize_bytes,int arraySize ){// ... CUDA/HIP memory copy calls }

> Listing 3: Example of how GPU memory is allocated and managed in GALÆXI. The top code snippet shows how the methods are called from Fortran. The bottom shows the API calls in C++ code. Pre-processor macros determine which API is used to allocate memory. This same design is used to expose all necessary functionality from vendor-specific C++ APIs in Fortran code.

Fortran code calls the wrapper API for GPU memory handling. The call passes to a C++ function which uses the backend appropriate memory allocator (e.g. cudaMal-loc) to allocate GPU memory. A pointer to this newly allocated GPU memory is returned to the Fortran side and stored in a Fortran variable. There it can be passed through functions in Fortran code and handed off to the C++ side later to perform operations on the data, such as memory copies and kernel launches. MPI communica-tion routines and other vendor model API calls for device synchronization, pinning, etc. are abstracted in the same fashion. As directly mapping runtime allocated, assumed-shape Fortran arrays to multi-dimensional C arrays is not pos-sible [53], all CPU-allocated Fortran arrays are mapped to flattened, one-dimensional arrays in GPU memory. To avoid reordering operations when copying data between the hardware and programming languages, data retains the original CPU allocated, Fortran column major order-ing in GPU kernels. A small set of indexing functions is used in kernel code to find the offset to a particular thread’s data in the flattened arrays. 6Algorithm 1 Face-local algorithm for projecting solution from big to small faces for two-to-one non-conforming ele-ment (mortar) interfaces on the CPU  

> 1:

function FillMortarFaces( N, nMortars , U, IL, IR, Mort map ) 

> 2:

for n ← 1 to nMortars do ▷ loop over mortar faces  

> 3:

! Perform mapping  

> 4:

for p, q ← 0 to N do ▷ loop over face DOFs  

> 5:

for r ← 0 to N do  

> 6:

! Interpolate (non-DOF local operation)  

> 7:

Utmp pq ,1 ← Utmp pq ,1 + Upr ,n ILrq  

> 8:

Utmp pq ,2 ← Utmp pq ,2 + Upr ,n IRrq  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

! Fill solution big to small  

> 12:

for p, q ← 0 to N do ▷ loop over face DOFs  

> 13:

for i ← 1 to 2 do ▷ two small sides per large  

> 14:

j ← Mort map i 

> 15:

Upq , j ← Utmp pq ,i 

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

return U 

> 20:

end function 3.2.2. Thread Level Parallelism The thread parallelization strategy of GPU kernels in GALÆXI, as is common in GPU-accelerated DG codes [54, 55, 56, 21], assumes a single GPU thread operates on a single degree of freedom (DOF). For the core operations of the DGSEM, this approach is appropriate, as many of those operations are pointwise, or DOF-local. This means individual DOFs can complete operations independently of all others without the need to handle data dependencies between GPU threads.      

> Table 3: Comparison of wall times for two configurations of the kernel used to fill fluxes at non-conforming mesh interfaces in GALÆXI. The times were taken on a single NVIDIA GeForce 4070 Ti Super GPU for 32 total non-conforming faces with a polynomial order of
> N=7.Times were collected using NVIDIA’s NSight Compute [57] profiling software. Approach Operation Wall Time [ms] Speedup

Face-local kernel 1.888 –Multiple DOF-local kernels 0.063 92 29.54x However, some operations in GALÆXI are not DOF-local. It was found that breaking such non-DOF-local operations into multiple, DOF-local kernels was signifi-cantly more performant that having one large non-DOF-local kernel. To emphasize, the procedure for filling non-conforming element interfaces is presented as an example. GALÆXI allows meshes to contain non-conforming ele-ment faces (i.e. hanging nodes), using the mortar tech-nique of Kopriva [58]. Algorithm 1 presents the face-local process used on the CPU to map the solution across such interfaces. The non-DOF local aspect of the algorithm is the filling of U for a given DOF p, q depends on result of the first tensor product, Utmp , for other DOFs in the face. Breaking Algorithm 1 into two DOF-local operations in-volves each loop over the DOFs in a face becoming its own operation. Every face must finish calculating the interme-diate solution Utmp and store it in global memory before the filling of U can proceed. Both face-local and DOF-local versions of Algorithm 1 were implemented as GPU kernels and tested. A com-parison of the performance for the two approaches is pre-sented in Table 3. The timings in the table were measured on a single NVIDIA GeForce 4070 Ti Super GPU using NVIDIA’s NSight Compute [57] profiling software. The computational mesh contained 32 non-conforming faces and the polynomial order was set to N = 7, resulting in 64 DOFs per non-conforming interface and 2048 total DOFs on all non-conforming interfaces. Translating Algorithm 1 directly to a GPU kernel which assigns each thread a sin-gle face (i.e. one thread operates on 64 DOFs), the op-eration completes in 1.888 ms. Using the split version of Algorithm 1 with two DOF-local GPU kernels results in a total runtime of 0.06392ms, a 29.54x speedup over the single face-local kernel. That runtime is for both DOF-local kernels combined, including launch latencies and tail effect (i.e. the time required to complete the last partial wave of computations in a kernel where GPU utilization is low). In general, any algorithm in GALÆXI that requires an intermediate value be calculated for multiple DOFs and then accessed in a non-DOF-local fashion by subsequent steps uses this kernel splitting approach. Some examples include the calculation of the modal troubled cell indica-tor and the switching operation of troubled DG cells to FV sub-cells. 3.2.3. Intra-GPU Parallelism To maximize occupancy, device streams are used on both AMD and NVIDIA GPUs. Detail of the DGSEM operation’s distribution across the device streams is shown in Figure 1. Summarized briefly, some operations in the DGSEM are input data-independent and can be performed simultaneously on two different device streams. An exam-ple is the conversion of the conservative variables to prim-itive variables (Cons. To Prim. (Volume) in Figure 1) in the volume and the prolongation of the conservative variables to the element faces (Prolong Solution To Face in Figure 1). GALÆXI uses three device streams with three levels of increasing priority. Kernels that operate on element faces located on the boundary between MPI processes are the highest priority, to ensure data for MPI communication is ready as early as possible. The lowest priority is for volume operations within elements, which are independent of neighboring elements. The volume op-erations can compute in the background while the opera-tions on element faces occur on the higher priority streams. A challenge with using device streams is that there is 7High stream Mid stream Low stream       

> Prolong Solution To Face Cons. To Prim. (Interior Sides) Cons. To Prim. (MPI Sides) Fill Lifted Fluxes (MPI Sides) Cons. To Prim. (Volume) Fill Lifted Fluxes (Interior Sides) Lifting Surface Int Prolong Gradients to Face Lifting Volume Integral Evaluate Fluxes Apply Deriv. Matrix Volume Integral Fill Fluxes (MPI Sides) Fill Fluxes (Interior Sides) Surface Integral Apply Jacobian
> MPI MPI MPI Figure 1: Evaluation timeline of the entropy-stable DGSEM from Eq. (3) including the lifting operator with device streams in GALÆXI. Computation proceeds from left to right. Operations on data needed for MPI communication are assigned to the highest priority stream. Large volumetric operations, such as the volume integration, are given lowest priority. All other operations are given middle priority.

no guarantee that upstream data dependencies are satis-fied before a kernel begins. To enforce data dependencies between kernels, device events are used. Device events are a CUDA/HIP construct that allows markers to be at-tached to a kernel and used downstream in the computa-tion to query the execution status of the kernel [18, 19]. In GALÆXI, all kernels have an associated device event. Before launching a kernel, event synchronizations are used to confirm upstream kernels that operate on that kernel’s input data are complete. 3.2.4. Inter-GPU Parallelism The final level of parallelism is that on distributed systems. The computational domain is divided into non-overlapping subdomains using a space-filling curve. Each subdomain is assigned to a single MPI process, which be-longs to a single CPU core for CPU backends and a CPU core-GPU pair for device-accelerated backends. Non-blocking, point-to-point MPI communication is used to pass data be-tween element faces that lie on subdomain boundaries. As with dependent kernels, device event synchronizations are used to check data for MPI communication is ready be-fore the passing step begins. A representation of how MPI communication features in the runtime of GALÆXI is in-cluded in Figure 1. In GALÆXI, device pinning, or the assignment of a GPU to a given MPI process/CPU core, is performed in-software using CUDA/HIP API calls. 4. Validation In the following section, the implemented numerical methods are validated, starting with a generic manufac-tured solution to demonstrate the convergence properties of the DGSEM. The discussion then progresses to the com-pressible Taylor–Green–Vortex to evaluate the scheme’s robustness and accuracy in the context of shock-turbulence interactions. 4.1. Convergence To verify the implementation of the DGSEM in GA-LÆXI, the spatial convergence of the scheme is rigorously tested using the method of manufactured solutions [59]. A periodic, rectilinear domain Ω = [−1, 1] 3 is initialized with a travelling, three-dimensional, sinusoidal solution of the form 

ρ = 2 + A sin(2 π(x + y + z − at )) , ρ u = ρ, ρ e = (ρ)2,

(4) where the amplitude and advection speed are chosen as 

A = 0.1 and a = 1, respectively. The solution is advanced in time to t = 1. The timestep is chosen sufficiently small as to have no influence on the discretization error. Table 4 presents the h-convergence behavior of the L2

error of the density on Gauss–Legendre quadrature nodes for a polynomial order of N = 3. As the computational mesh is incrementally refined from a single element up to 

83 elements, the results confirm the theoretical order of convergence and the values for the L2 error match to dou-ble precision across all three compared architectures. For the p-convergence study, a mesh size of 43 elements was held fixed and the polynomial order N ∈ [4 , 8] gradually increased. Again the values for the L2 error of the den-sity match to double precision for all architectures and demonstrate the expected exponential decay with increas-ing polynomial degree, cf. Table 5. 4.2. Compressible Taylor-Green-Vortex The compressible Taylor–Green-Vortex (TGV) at a Mach number of Ma 0 = 1.25 is a common benchmark for as-sessing the performance of numerical schemes in capturing small scale turbulent structures while providing necessary dissipation to stabilize localized discontinuities [60]. This makes the compressible TGV particularly suited to ex-amine the ability of GALÆXI to simulate problems with complex shock-turbulence interactions. Initial conditions for the velocity and pressure fields are given analytically as 8Table 4: h-convergence of GALÆXI for a manufactured solution with a polynomial order of N = 3. Meshes were refined from a single element to 83 elements. Grid CPU NVIDIA GH200 AMD MI250X 

L2 Error EOC L2 Error EOC L2 Error EOC 

13 7.653 × 10 −2 – 7.653 × 10 −2 – 7.653 × 10 −2 –

23 3.393 × 10 −3 4.496 3.393 × 10 −3 4.496 3.393 × 10 −3 4.496 43 3.030 × 10 −4 3.485 3.030 × 10 −4 3.485 3.030 × 10 −4 3.485 83 1.473 × 10 −5 4.362 1.473 × 10 −5 4.362 1.473 × 10 −5 4.362 

Table 5: p-convergence of GALÆXI using a manufactured solution on a 43 element mesh. N L2 Error CPU NVIDIA GH200 AMD MI250X 

4 1.789 × 10 −5 1.789 × 10 −5 1.789 × 10 −5

5 3.623 × 10 −6 3.623 × 10 −6 3.623 × 10 −6

6 1.046 × 10 −7 1.046 × 10 −7 1.046 × 10 −7

7 4.674 × 10 −8 4.674 × 10 −8 4.674 × 10 −8

8 7.473 × 10 −10 7.473 × 10 −10 7.473 × 10 −10 

9 3.634 × 10 −10 3.634 × 10 −10 3.634 × 10 −10 

u(x, 0) =



U0 sin ( xL

) cos ( yL

) cos ( zL

)

−U0 cos ( xL

) sin ( yL

) cos ( zL

)

0

 , (5) 

p(x, 0) = p0 + ρ0U20

16 

(cos ( 2xL

) + cos ( 2yL

)) ( 2 + cos ( 2zL

)) ,

where L = 1 is the characteristic length, U0 = 1 is the magnitude of the initial velocity fluctuations and ρ0 = 1

the reference density. The initial pressure p0 is chosen to match a prescribed background Mach number Ma 0 =

U0

√ρ0/(γp0). The domain is a periodic cube with dimen-sions Ω ∈ [0 , 2πL]3. To yield a complete set of initial condi-tions for a compressible flow field, the density is specified using the equation of state of an ideal gas ρ(x, 0) = pRT 0 with the temperature T (x, t = 0) = T0. The desired Reynolds number, chosen as Re = ρ0U0 L/μ0 = 1600 , is obtained by adjusting the initial dynamic viscosity μ0.The accuracy of the numerical scheme is assessed by two commonly used metrics, the integral kinetic energy, 

Ek = 12ρ0U20 |Ω|

∫

> Ω

ρ u · u dΩ, (6) and the solenoidal component of the viscous dissipation rate, defined in Sarkar et al. [61] as 

εS = L2

Re U20 |Ω|

∫

> Ω

μ(T )

μ0

ω · ω dΩ, (7) where |Ω| is the total volume of the computational domain, 

μ(T ) is the temperature-dependent dynamic viscosity of the fluid, computed using Sutherland’s law [62] and ω is the vorticity vector. 

Figure 2: Comparison of the integral kinetic energy Ek (top left) and solenoidal viscous dissipation rate εS (top right) for the supersonic, compressible TGV. All simulations used a mesh with 16 3 elements and a polynomial order of N = 3. CPU computations for FLEXI and GALÆXI were performed on AMD EPYC CPUs. The results from FLEXI are presented as the reference solution. The results for the GPU backends in GALÆXI are shown for AMD MI300A APUs and NVIDIA A100 GPUs. The percent error in the solutions with GALÆXI on the selected hardware is also presented for Ek (bottom left) and εS (bottom right) 

9Figure 3: Center plane slice of a Schlieren image of the flow field for the compressible TGV case with Ma 0 = 1.25 and Re = 1600 at time   

> t=15 . Presented solution was computed with NVIDIA A100 GPUs on the Leonardo Booster supercomputer.

Computations were performed on a 16 3 element mesh with a polynomial order of N = 3. To suppress aliasing errors and ensure numerical stability in the presence of strong gradients, the entropy-stable DGSEM on Gauss– Legendre nodes coupled with a FV sub-cell based shock capturing approach was employed. CPU results were col-lected on the Discoverer supercomputer [63] in Sophia, Bulgaria, with the solution from the CPU-only DGSEM framework FLEXI serving as the reference. The GPU com-putations with GALÆXI were performed with the AMD MI300A APUs on the Hunter supercomputer [64] at the High Performance Computing Center Stuttgart (HLRS) and the NVIDIA A100 GPUs on the Booster partition of the Leonardo supercomputer [65] at CINECA in Bologna, Italy. The results of the compressible TGV are given in Fig-ure 2. The bottom two plots of Figure 2 provide the per-cent error in Ek and εS of the solutions from GALÆXI rela-tive to the reference solution. The maximum percent error for the CPU backends of GALÆXI is 1.906 × 10 −11 % and 

7.899 × 10 −10 % for Ek and εS , respectively. For the GPU backends, the NVIDIA A100s and AMD MI300 produced comparable solutions, both with maximum percent errors of 0.007 % for Ek and 0.122 % for εS . A two-dimensional slice of the instantaneous solution at t = 15 is given in Figure 3. The slice was taken at the center plane of the domain and shows a Schlieren image of the flow field using the result from Leonardo. 5. Performance Evaluation To demonstrate the portability of GALÆXI, it was de-ployed on eleven HPC systems. The hardware and con-figuration of each of these systems is summarized in Ta-ble 6. Throughout the remaining sections of this publica-tion these systems will be referred to by the System Name listed in Table 6. Please note that the AMD MI250X is a multi-chip mod-ule (MCM) and a single MI250X contains two GPU dies, called graphics compute devices (GCDs) [74, 70]. There-fore, in Table 6 and throughout the rest of this work, when the number of MI250X GPUs is mentioned, this is the number of total GCDs, which is always twice the number of AMD MI250X modules. 5.1. Performance Metrics The primary performance metric for comparing back-ends of GALÆXI is the time-to-solution, which the is total wall time required for a computation in GALÆXI to com-plete, including the time required for operations such as data initialization and file output. In some cases, another metric known as the performance index (PID) is used. The PID represents the time to integrate a single DOF through single RK stage on a single CPU core or single GPU and is defined as PID = Walltime × #Ranks 

#RK-stages × #DOF . (8) When energy consumption is discussed, total power draw of a simulation will be given in megajoules (MJ). Where available, the sacct tool from SLURM [75] was used to report energy usage. The exception to this was on Marenostrum 5, where the EAR [76] framework was used. 5.2. Scaling Performance on GPU Systems The parallel performance of GALÆXI on GPU-accelerated systems was investigated using strong and weak scaling experiments. For both weak and strong scaling, a simu-lation of a freestream flow is advanced ten timesteps on a Cartesian mesh. The tests are run with the split-flux formulation of the DGSEM on Legendre-Gauss-Lobatto nodes using the full hyperbolic-parabolic NSE equations. All console and file output is deactivated and the polyno-mial order is held at N = 9. Each case is run three times and the performance metrics are averaged. For the strong scaling experiments, the wall time on the smallest number of GPUs in a given sweep is used as the baseline for cal-culations of parallel speedup. The single node wall time is used to calculate parallel efficiency in the weak scaling experiments. For strong scaling, the resolution of a Cartesian mesh is held constant while the number of GPUs used to com-pute the case is increased by doubling the previous number of GPUs. For weak scaling, the mesh sizes are increased 10 Table 6: Hardware overview for the systems used for GALÆXI development and testing. Due to the amount of systems, only the most basic information can be included. Note that the listed ”CPU Node Hardware” corresponds to the CPU-only compute nodes. For some systems, the host CPU architecture on GPU-accelerated nodes differs from the CPU-only compute nodes. For those systems that do not have CPU-only compute nodes, the ”CPU Node Hardware” is left blank. Detailed information on individual systems is available in the cited references. System Name Computing Center Location CPU Node Hardware # CPUs GPU Node Hardware # GPUs 

Deucalion x86 [66] MACC Guimarães, PT AMD EPYC 64 000 NVIDIA A100 132 Discoverer [63] SofiaTech Sofia, BG AMD EPYC 144 384 NVIDIA H200 32 Frontier [67] OLCF Oak Ridge, TN, USA – – AMD MI250X 78848 Hunter [64] HLRS Stuttgart, DE – – AMD MI300A 752 

JUPITER [68] FZJ Jülich, DE – – NVIDIA GH200 23 536 

Karolina [69] IT4I Ostrava, CZ AMD EPYC 92 160 NVIDIA A100 576 Leonardo [65] CINECA Bologna, IT Intel Xeon 172 032 NVIDIA A100 13 824 

LUMI [70] CSC Kajaani, FI AMD EPYC 262 144 AMD MI250X 23 824 

Marenostrum5 [71] BSC Barcelona, ES Intel Xeon 726 880 NVIDIA H100 4480 

MeluXina [72] LuxProvide Bertrange, LU AMD EPYC 73 216 NVIDIA A100 800 Vega [73] IZUM Maribor, SI AMD EPYC 98 304 NVIDIA A100 240    

> Table 7: Mesh resolutions for the strong and weak scaling tests of GALÆXI on GPU-accelerated systems. For the strong scaling meshes, the number of DOFs for the entire domain is presented. For weak scaling the resolutions are given in DOFs/GPU. System Mesh Resolution (in DOFs) Strong Weak (per GPU)

Hunter 5.243 × 10 9 4.096 × 10 6

Frontier 16 .780 × 10 9 1.024 × 10 6

JUPITER 8.389 × 10 9 8.192 × 10 6

LUMI 2.097 × 10 9 2.05 × 10 6

Marenostrum 5 0.453 × 10 9 1.77 × 10 6

in conjunction with the number of GPUs to maintain the same load per GPU in each case. The selected mesh res-olutions for each system are given in Table 7. All meshes for this scaling study were generated using the open-source pre-processing framework pyHOPE [77]. The final results of the scaling tests for a selection of systems are found in Figure 4. GALÆXI demonstrated near linear strong scaling on all systems, regardless of architecture. Strong scaling up to 65 536 AMD MI250X GCDs on Frontier was achieved. For weak scaling, GALÆXI achieves above 80% parallel efficiency on all systems for the investigated ranges. The largest weak scaling case in that study featured a mesh of 67.1 billion DOFs on 65 536 MI250X GCDs on Frontier with a parallel efficiency of 82.6%. 5.3. Scaling Performance on CPU Systems   

> Table 8: Mesh resolutions for the strong and weak scaling tests of GALÆXI on CPU systems. For the strong scaling meshes, the num-ber of DOFs for the entire domain is presented. For weak scaling the resolutions are given in DOFs/core. System Mesh Resolution (in DOFs) Strong Weak (per core)

Deucalion x86 2.83 × 10 6 6192 

Discoverer 2.83 × 10 6 6192 

Karolina 2.83 × 10 6 6192 

LUMI 226 .5 × 10 6 6192 

MeluXina 2.83 × 10 6 6192 

Marenostrum 5 56 .6 × 10 6 7899 

Vega 2.83 × 10 6 6192 

As was described in Section 3.2, the ability to perform CPU computations was retained in GALÆXI. To mea-sure the scaling performance of the CPU backends, scal-ing experiments similar to those performed for the GPU backends were repeated. For all CPU scaling tests, the polynomial order is held at N = 5. Otherwise, the setup for the CPU scaling tests exactly mirrored those for GPUs described in Section 5.2. The mesh resolutions selected 11 Figure 4: Strong (left) and weak (right) scaling performance of GALÆXI on GPU-accelerated HPC systems. 

Figure 5: Strong (left) and weak (right) scaling performance of GALÆXI on CPU-based HPC systems. 

12 for the scaling tests on CPU systems are given in Table 8. The results of these experiments are shown in Figure 5. Due to reduced cache pressure, GALÆXI showed su-perlinear strong scaling on all tested systems, including on up to 65 536 CPU cores on LUMI and 28 672 CPU cores on Marenostrum 5. Weak scaling performance up to 65 536 

CPU cores on LUMI and 57 344 CPU cores on Marenos-trum 5 was achieved, with parallel efficiencies on those two systems higher than 80% for the largest cases. Parallel ef-ficiencies higher than 60% were observed for all systems for the largest tested CPU core counts. 5.4. Single Node Performance Table 9 presents a comparison of the CPU and GPU backends with regards to both PID and time-to-solution. For this comparison, a problem size of 16.78 million DOFs was used, with polynomial order of N = 3. A freestream flow was simulated on a full CPU node on Karolina, which consist of 128 AMD EPYC 7H12 CPU cores [69], and a full node on Hunter, with four AMD MI300A accelerated processing units (APUs) [64]. This was repeated three times and the results averaged for each architecture. Legendre-Gauss nodes were used. For the simulations featuring FV sub-cell shock capturing, 50% of the cells are forced into the FV repre-sentation in a checkerboard pattern by a special troubled cell indicator. The simulation was allowed to run for ten timesteps and the PID and time-to-solution measured. Comparing the performance of the two backends of GALÆXI on Hunter, a 519.1x speedup in PID is seen for full DG and a 393.1x for DG/FV hybrids simulations. The theoretical throughput of an AMD MI300A for 64-bit floating point operations is 61 × 10 12 FLOPs [78] and the corresponding value for a single AMD EPYC 7H12 core is 26 .4 × 10 9 FLOPs [79]. As the PID is effectively com-paring a single AMD MI300A APU to a single CPU core, such a large speedup in PID is expected. A fairer com-parison of the performance of the two architectures is the total time-to-solution. The time-to-solution measurements include serializations, such as solution initialization, data analysis and file output, which are not accounted for in the PID and are largely carried out on the CPU in GALÆXI. Speedups in time-to-solution for Hunter versus the CPU computations are 7.75x and 8.08x for full DG and DG/FV hybrid, respectively, providing a more realistic picture of the benefits in real applications from GPU-acceleration in GALÆXI. Superior throughput also enables GPUs to compute the same problem sizes on a smaller hardware footprint, improving energy consumption versus CPU-based com-putations. Table 10 presents a comparison of energy-to-solution from the CPU and GPU backends. To collect the data in Table 10, a freestream flow was calculated on a Cartesian mesh with 16.78 million DOFs at a polynomial order of N = 7. The simulation was allowed to progress for 1000 timesteps and energy measured on the two systems using the methods described in Section 5.1. The results in Table 10 were collected on a single, full node on each system and hardware. On LUMI, this corresponds to 128 AMD EPYC 7763 CPU cores for the CPU simulations and eight AMD MI250X GCDs for the GPU simulations [70]. On Marenostrum 5 a single CPU node contains 112 Intel Sapphire Rapids 8480+ cores and a GPU-accelerated node features four NVIDIA H100 GPUs [71]. The reductions in energy-to-solution for the GPU com-putations are 2.05x for Marenostrum 5 and 2.06x on LUMI. The GPU-accelerated simulations in GALÆXI therefore require half of the energy per node as those on CPU-based systems to compute the same problem. This value also includes the energy consumed performing initializa-tion, mesh handling and other non-compute intensive op-erations that are performed on the CPU even for GPU-accelerated runs. 6. Applications To demonstrate the capabilities of GALÆXI for production-scale cases, it is applied to two WRLES of transonic flow over two airfoil configurations, the National Advisory Com-mittee for Aeronautics (NACA) 64A-110 and the Office National d’etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (ONERA) OAT15A. In this section, results are presented for both configura-tions and the performance of the CPU and GPU backends in GALÆXI are compared. 6.1. Transonic flow over a NACA 64A-110 airfoil 6.1.1. Problem Description and Setup The NACA 64A-110 was selected as an example geom-etry for airfoils commonly used in the horizontal tails of aircraft. From a computational perspective, it serves as a model case for compressible, turbulent flow fields without the presence of shock waves. The two-dimensional airfoil profile is extended to a spanwise extent of 0.05 c, where c is the airfoil chord length. The airfoil is subjected to a freestream flow with a Reynolds number of Re c = 9.3 × 10 5 based on the chord length and a Mach number of Ma = 0.72 . The airfoil is oriented at an angle of attack (AoA) of α = 0◦. The entropy-stable DGSEM on Legendre–Gauss–Lobatto nodes are integrated in time by using the RK4-14 for additional numerical sta-bility. The polynomial order is set to N = 7, resulting in a computational domain with 663 million DOFs. The mesh uses curved boundaries and nearfield volume ele-ments, represented by a polynomial degree of NGeo = 4,to accurately represent the curvature of the airfoil geom-etry. To force the turbulent transition of the boundary layer, a geometric trip is placed at x/c = 0.05 . The trip is applied on both the pressure and suction sides of the airfoil. It is extended into the boundary layer to an ap-proximate non-dimensional wall distance of y+ ∈ [40 , 60] .To prevent non-physical behavior at the farfield bound-aries, an exponentially decaying filter by Pruett [80] in a 13 Table 9: Comparison of PID and time-to-solution on Karolina and Hunter with a problem size of 16.78 million DOFs with a polynomial order of N = 3. Results are compared full node to full node, i.e. 128 AMD EPYC 7H12 CPU cores for Karolina CPU and 4 AMD MI300As on Hunter. % FV denotes the percentage of total elements switched to use FV sub-cells. System Hardware % FV PID [s] Speedup vs CPU Time To Solution [s] Speedup vs CPU 

Karolina CPU 0 1.852 × 10 −6 – 525 .13 –50 3.286 × 10 −6 – 929 .47 –Hunter AMD MI300A 0 3.569 × 10 −9 519.1x 67 .73 7.75x 50 8.359 × 10 −9 393.1x 115 .03 8.08x       

> Table 10: Comparison of energy-to-solution on Marenostrum 5 and LUMI with a problem size of 16.78 million DOFs with a polynomial order of N=7.energy-to-solution results are compared full node to full node, i.e 112 Intel Xeon CPU cores to four NVIDIA H100s for Marenostrum 5 [71] and 128 AMD EPYC cores to eight AMD MI250X GCDs on LUMI [70]. System Hardware Energy To Solution [MJ] Improvement vs CPU

Marenostrum 5 CPU 32 .16 –GPU 15 .67 2.05x LUMI CPU 27 .43 –GPU 13 .34 2.06x region starting at a radius of 50 c from the airfoil is added. All computations were carried out on LUMI. The CPU-based simulations were performed on 256 nodes ( 32 768 

CPU cores) resulting in 20 248 DOFs per CPU core. For the GPU-accelerated case, the AMD HIP backend of GA-LÆXI was deployed on 128 nodes ( 1024 AMD MI250X GCDs) resulting in a load of 647 928 DOFs/GPU. For both architectures, benchmark simulations were initialized with a pre-converged flow state that was ad-vanced for 67 characteristic time units (CTUs) t∗ = tu ∞/c,where t is the solution time and u∞ is the freestream veloc-ity. From this initial point, the solution is advanced in all cases for two additional CTUs. The flow data is analyzed and written to file every 0.2t∗, a configuration intended to mimic production scenarios. Data analysis and output at each checkpoint includes the full instantaneous and time-averaged flow field and the local instantaneous flow state at a set of probe points along the airfoil surface. 6.1.2. Results A representation of flow field at t∗ = 69 colored by lo-cal Mach number is shown in Figure 6. The results shown in this figure come from the GPU-accelerated simulation. The flow in the figure proceeds from left to right. The strong geometric trip on both sides of the airfoil are vis-ible near the leading edge. After the trip, the boundary transitions to a fully turbulent state and well-developed turbulent structures can be seen in the immediate vicinity of the trailing edge. Figure 7 compares the evolution of the surface pressure 

Cp coefficient along the chord of the airfoil from the CPU and AMD GPU backends of GALÆXI. Spanwise-averaged flow data from the surface of the airfoil at t∗ = 69 is used to calculate the coefficients. The bottom plot of Figure 7 presents the absolute difference of the two solutions which is greatest immediately downstream of the geometric trip and settles into a range of 1×10 −4 to 1×10 −2 along the air-foil. The average percent difference along the chord length between the two architectures is 0.41%, showing excellent agreement. Execution of both CPU and GPU backends in GALÆXI is non-deterministic, so small differences in the solutions are expected. These results demonstrate GALÆ-XI’s ability to deliver robust solutions in production-scale turbulent flow cases regardless of the compute backend used.   

> Table 11: Performance comparisons for simulations of the NACA 64A-110 with the CPU and AMD HIP backends of GALÆXI. Com-putations were performed on LUMI. Note that the value of ’Ranks’ for the GPU results corresponds to the number of AMD MI250X GCDs. Hardware

Ranks DOFs/Rank Time To Solution per CTU [s] Speedup vs CPU 

CPU 32 768 20 248 49 097 –AMD MI250X 1024 647 928 14 172 3.46x 

A comparison of the achieved time-to-solution of a sin-gle CTU for all three simulations is found in Table 11. The GPU-accelerated AMD HIP backends of GALÆXI required 3.93 hours to complete a single CTU versus 13 .6

hours for the CPU backends, providing a improvement in time-to-solution of 3.46x. 6.2. Transonic shock-buffet on a OAT15A airfoil 6.2.1. Problem Description and Setup The second application presented is an ONERA OAT15A airfoil under shock-buffet conditions. The OAT15A is a supercritical airfoil that represents a typical main wing cross-section on transport aircraft and was designed as a validation case for CFD codes [81]. In the context of this work, the OAT15A builds upon the previous section by fea-turing a flow field with shock waves and shock-turbulence interaction. The initial and freestream flow conditions are described by a Reynolds number of Re c = 3 × 10 6 based on the chord length of the airfoil and a Mach number of Ma = 0.73 .The airfoil is oriented with an AoA of α = 3.5◦ relative 14 Figure 6: Isosurface of the instantaneous Mach number at t∗ = 69 for the NACA 64A-110 airfoil at α = 0◦. The visualized plane is located at the center point of the airfoil extent in the spanwise direction. Presented data was computed on LUMI with AMD MI250X GPUs.      

> Figure 7: Comparison of the results for the CPU and AMD GPU backends of GALÆXI for the NACA 64A-110 using the variation of surface pressure coefficient (top) along the chord. Calculation of the coefficients used spanwise-averaged flow state data at t∗=69
> using data from probe points along both sides of the airfoil. The absolute difference between the two solutions (bottom) is calculated as the absolute value of the difference between the CPU and GPU-accelerated solutions.

to the freestream. The influence of artificial reflections at the farfield boundary is prevented by choosing a large farfield radius of 80 c and by again applying the exponential decaying Pruett filter in a region starting at a radius of 50 c

from the airfoil. Again, the entropy-stable DGSEM on Legendre–Gauss–Lobatto nodes in combination with the RK4-14 for time integration is employed with a polyno-mial order of N = 3. To preserve the high-order accuracy of the DGSEM, the hybrid structured-unstructured com-putational mesh features curved surface elements, repre-sented by a polynomial order of NGeo = 3. Numerical sta-bility in the presence of discontinuities is ensured by the FV sub-cell shock capturing scheme using the troubled cell indicator of Persson [49]. CPU computations with GALÆXI were run with 25 600 

CPU cores ( 200 nodes) on LUMI. This results in a load of ∼8000 DOFs/core for CPU core. GPU computations were performed on 112 NVIDIA A100 GPUs on Karolina and 112 AMD MI300A APUs on Hunter. The number of GPUs for the Karolina simulation is chosen such that the resulting computational load per GPU is ∼2 × 10 6 DOFs. For the AMD MI300A APUs featured on Hunter, the same approximate load of ∼2 × 10 6 DOFs/APU is used. For this case, the solution for each architecture is com-puted separately starting from t = 0 with the same, con-stant initial solution. The solution is advanced to t∗ = 28 

with N = 1 to overcome non-physical transient effects early in the solution. The simulations are then restarted using the same mesh and problem conditions, but using the fi-nal N = 3 polynomial order. The solution is subsequently advanced with N = 3 for a single buffet cycle, which corre-sponds to 14 CTUs, to record data for each architecture. 6.2.2. Results A rendering of the instantaneous flow field at t∗ = 42 

for the simulation performed on Hunter can be found in Figure 8. A slice plane, which shows the flow field col-ored by the local Mach number, forms the background of the figure. The surface of the airfoil is colored by the static pressure. The separated wake downstream of the 15 Figure 8: Visualization of the flow around ONERA OAT15A airfoil at α = 3.5◦ at t∗ = 42 . The visualized plane in the background shows the flow field colored by instantaneous Mach number. The surface of the airfoil is colored by static pressure. The separated wake is demonstrated with a isosurface of Q-criterion, also colored by Mach number. Cells which have been switched to a FV representation near the shock wave are shown by the translucent grey region on the upper surface of the airfoil. Presented data was computed on Hunter with AMD MI300A APUs. 

shock wave boundary layer interaction (SWBLI) is visual-ized using isocontours of the Q-criterion which are colored by local Mach number. In the region of the shock wave, gray volume shading is added to those cells which have been marked by the troubled cell indicator and switched to the sub-cell FV representation. A comparison of the time-to-solution and compute re-sources consumed for a single CTU (in node-hours) for the OAT15A across multiple architectures is given in Ta-ble 12. The GPU-accelerated AMD HIP backends of GA-LÆXI on Hunter and the NVIDIA CUDA backends on Karolina required comparable time-to-solution to the CPU cases. However, the AMD HIP backend of GALÆXI re-quired 6.45x fewer computing resources the CPU backends to obtain the same solution in the same wall time. That directly translates to improved energy consumption and emphasizes that the gains in energy efficiency seen for sin-gle nodes in Section 5.4 translate to production runs of GALÆXI. 7. Conclusion A significant roadblock to modern computational fluid dynamics software is the need to support constantly evolv-ing, heterogeneous computing environments. This is espe-cially true for software intended for the study of turbu-lent flows, which often demand high-fidelity simulations on the largest computing resources available. To address this challenge, the discontinuous Galerkin spectral ele-ment method framework GALÆXI was presented as an architecture-agnostic toolchain to enable the study of com-plex, compressible, turbulent flows at extreme scales. GALÆXI offers hardware-agnostic portability, achieved by interfacing a core of Fortran source code to C++ com-pute kernels that are compiled as either CUDA for NVIDIA GPUs or HIP for AMD GPUs. For CPU-based systems, compute routines in Fortran are retained from a CPU-only predecessor. The portability approach employed in GALÆXI provides a template for similar Fortran-based software to achieve comparable results. GALÆXI has also demonstrated extreme scalability. On GPUs from multi-ple vendors, GALÆXI achieved near ideal strong and weak scaling up to 65 536 GPUs. In the largest weak scaling case, GALÆXI computed a case with 67.1 billion DOFs on 

65 536 MI250X graphics compute devices on the Frontier supercomputer with a parallel efficiency of 82.6%, demon-strating GALÆXI’s ability to effectively scale up to on tens of thousands of accelerators. On CPUs, superlinear strong scaling was seen on up to 65 536 CPU cores. Futher-more, GALÆXI allows robust, high-order accurate solu-tions for compressible flow problems that feature shock-turbulence interactions. The solver was validated using the compressible Taylor-Green-Vortex, where solutions for 16 Table 12: Performance comparisons for simulations of the ONERA OAT15A with the CPU and AMD HIP backends of GALÆXI. The CPU and GPU-accelerated calculations were performed on LUMI and Hunter, respectively. Note that the value of ’Ranks’ for the GALÆXI Hunter results corresponds to the number of full AMD MI300A APUs. Hardware Ranks DOFs / Rank Time To Solution per CTU [s] Speedup vs CPU Node-hours per CTU 

CPU (LUMI) 25 600 8668 9647 .46 – 536 AMD MI300A (Hunter) 112 1 981 481 10 690 .28 0.90x 83 NVIDIA A100 (Karolina) 112 1 981 481 10 790 .97 0.89x 84 all backends of GALÆXI showed excellent agreement with reference data. To demonstrate GALÆXI effectiveness for production-scale problems, wall-resolved large eddy sim-ulations of transonic flows over NACA 64A-110 and ON-ERA OAT15A airfoil configurations were performed. For the NACA airfoil, the simulation with the 1024 AMD MI250X GCDs on LUMI provided a 3.46x improvement in time-to-solution over a CPU run on 32 768 CPU cores. Re-sults from the CPU and AMD HIP backends of GALÆXI showed excellent agreement for the NACA 64A-110, pro-ducing an average percent difference in the surface pres-sure coefficient along the chord length of 0.41%. Data Availability Statement The source code of GALÆXI is available under the GPLv3 license at: • https://github.com/flexi-framework/galaexi The data generated in the context of this work and instructions to reproduce them with these codes are made available under the CC-BY 4.0 license sorted by section at: • 10.18419/DARUS-6118 (Section 3) • 10.18419/DARUS-6120 (Section 4) • 10.18419/DARUS-6119 (Section 5) • 10.18419/DARUS-6121 (Section 6) Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known compet-ing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. CRediT authorship contribution statement Spencer Starr: Conceptualization, Methodology, Soft-ware, Validation, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Data Cu-ration, Writing - Original Draft, Visualization, Project Ad-ministration Yannik Feldner: Methodology, Software, In-vestigation, Formal Analysis, Writing - Review & Editing, Visualization Patrick Kopper Conceptualization, Method-ology, Software, Formal Analysis, Writing - Review & Editing Marcel Blind: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software Daniel Kempf: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Supervision Jannik Schrempp: Software Felix Rodach: Software An-drea Beck: Writing - Review & Editing, Resources, Super-vision, Project Administration, Funding acquisition Anna Schwarz: Writing - Review & Editing, Visualization, Con-ceptualization, Supervision Acknowledgments This work was funded by the European Union. This work has received funding from the European High Per-formance Computing Joint Undertaking (JU) and Sweden, Germany, Spain, Greece, and Denmark under grant agree-ment No 101093393. Further funding was provided by the Deutsche Forschungs-gemeinschaft DFG (German Research Foundation) in the framework of the research unit FOR 2895 (Grant No. BE 6100/3-1 and BE 6100/3-2). The authors also thank the Friedrich und Elisabeth Boysen-Stiftung for supporting the work under grant BOY187. We acknowledge EuroHPC Joint Undertaking for award-ing us access to Vega at IZUM, Slovenia, Karolina at IT4Innovations Czech Republic, MeluXina at LuxProvide, Luxembourg, Discoverer at SofiaTech, Bulgaria, LUMI at CSC, Finland, Leonardo at CINECA, Italy, Marenostrum5 at BSC, Spain and Deucalion at MACC, Portugal. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Gauss Centre for Supercomputing e.V. (www.gauss-centre.eu) for fund-ing this project by providing computing time through the John von Neumann Institute for Computing (NIC) on the GCS Supercomputer JUPITER at Jülich Supercomputing Centre (JSC) as well as the support and the computing time on ”Hunter” by the Supercomputing Centre Stuttgart (HLRS) through the project ”hpcdg”. This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leader-ship Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge National Lab-oratory, which is supported by the Advanced Scientific Computing Research programs in the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725. This work was completed in part at the 2024 and 2025 Helmholtz GPU Hackathons, part of the Open Hackathons program. The authors would like to acknowledge 17 OpenACC-Standard.org, JSC, HZDR, and HIDA for their support. The authors would also like to acknowledge individual contributions from Marius Kurz and Johanna Potyka at AMD, Philipp Offenhäuser from Hewlett-Packard Enterprises (HPE). References 

[1] TOP500 - November 2025, https://www.top500.org/lists/ top500/list/2025/11/, 2025. Accessed: 2026-14-01. [2] TOP500 - November 2020, https://www.top500.org/lists/ top500/list/2020/11/, 2020. Accessed: 2026-14-01. [3] L. Gasparino, F. Spiga, O. Lehmkuhl, SOD2D: A GPU-enabled spectral finite elements method for compressible scale-resolving simulations, Computer Physics Communications 297 (2024) 109067. [4] F. D. Witherden, P. E. Vincent, W. Trojak, Y. Abe, A. Ak-barzadeh, S. Akkurt, M. Alhawwary, L. Caros, T. Dzanic, G. Giangaspero, et al., PyFR v2.0.3: Towards industrial adop-tion of scale-resolving simulations, Computer Physics Commu-nications 311 (2025) 109567. [5] P.-E. Eleftherakis, G. Anagnostopoulos, A. Kapetanakis, M. Umair, J.-Y. Vet, K. Iliakis, J. Vincent, J. Gong, R. Vin-uesa, S. Xydis, POSTER: Performance Portability in GPU-Accelerated Spectral Finite Element Fluid Simulations: ACross-layer Exploration Approach, in: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM International Conference on Computing Frontiers, 2025, pp. 228–229. [6] T. Dzanic, F. Witherden, Positivity-preserving entropy-based adaptive filtering for discontinuous spectral element methods, Journal of Computational Physics 468 (2022) 111501. doi:https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2022.111501. [7] Mako, Mako Templates for Python, https://www. makotemplates.org/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-23-04. [8] K. Fujii, S. Kawai, D. Gaitonde, Scale Resolving Methods for Aeronautical Flows toward the Era of “Industrial LES”, Flow, Turbulence and Combustion 115 (2025) 405–446. [9] A. Ceci, A. Palumbo, S. Pirozzoli, Grid resolution requirements for dns of shock/boundary-layer interactions, Computers & Flu-ids (2025) 106892. [10] J. Zeifang, A. Beck, A data-driven high order sub-cell artifi-cial viscosity for the discontinuous Galerkin spectral element method, Journal of Computational Physics 441 (2021) 110475. doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110475. [11] A. Herten, Many Cores, Many Models: GPU Programming Model vs. Vendor Compatibility Overview, in: Proceedings of the SC ’23 Workshops of the International Conference on High Performance Computing, Network, Storage, and Analysis, SC-W ’23, Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, pp. 1019– 1026. doi:10.1145/3624062.3624178. [12] P. Fischer, J. Lottes, H. Tufo, Nek5000, Technical Report, Ar-gonne National Lab, Argonne, IL (United States), 2007. [13] F. De Vanna, F. Avanzi, M. Cogo, S. Sandrin, M. Bettencourt, F. Picano, E. Benini, URANOS: A GPU accelerated Navier-Stokes solver for compressible wall-bounded flows, Computer Physics Communications 287 (2023) 108717. [14] N. Jansson, M. Karp, A. Podobas, S. Markidis, P. Schlatter, Neko: A modern, portable, and scalable framework for high-fidelity computational fluid dynamics, Computers & Fluids (2024) 106243. [15] N. Krais, A. Beck, T. Bolemann, H. Frank, D. Flad, G. Gassner, F. Hindenlang, M. Hoffmann, T. Kuhn, M. Sonntag, C.-D. Munz, FLEXI: A high order discontinuous Galerkin frame-work for hyperbolic–parabolic conservation laws, Computers & Mathematics with Applications 81 (2021) 186–219. [16] G. Rubio, HORSES3D: a high-order discontinuous Galerkin solver for flow simulations and multi-physics applications, arXiv (Cornell University) (2022). [17] P. Fischer, S. Kerkemeier, M. Min, Y.-H. Lan, M. Phillips, T. Rathnayake, E. Merzari, A. Tomboulides, A. Karakus, N. Chalmers, et al., NekRS, a GPU-accelerated spectral element Navier–Stokes solver, Parallel Computing 114 (2022) 102982. [18] NVIDIA, CUDA Toolkit, https://developer.nvidia.com/ cuda-toolkit, 2026. Accessed: 2026-11-03. [19] Advanced Micro Devices, HIP, https://rocm.docs.amd.com/ projects/HIP/en/latest/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-11-03. [20] M. Blind, M. Gao, D. Kempf, P. Kopper, M. Kurz, A. Schwarz, A. Beck, Towards Exascale CFD Simulations Using the Discon-tinuous Galerkin Solver FLEXI, Springer Nature Switzerland, 2026, pp. 207–221. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-91312-9_15. [21] M. Kurz, D. Kempf, M. Blind, P. Kopper, P. Offenhäuser, A. Schwarz, S. Starr, J. Keim, A. Beck, GALÆXI: Solving com-plex compressible flows with high-order discontinuous Galerkin methods on accelerator-based systems, Computer Physics Com-munications 306 (2024). doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2024.109388. [22] M. Sonntag, C.-D. Munz, Shock capturing for discontinuous Galerkin methods using finite volume subcells, in: Finite Vol-umes for Complex Applications VII-Elliptic, Parabolic and Hy-perbolic Problems: FVCA 7, Berlin, June 2014, Springer, 2014, pp. 945–953. [23] A. D. Beck, T. Bolemann, D. Flad, H. Frank, G. J. Gassner, F. Hindenlang, C.-D. Munz, High-order discontinuous Galerkin spectral element methods for transitional and turbulent flow simulations, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids 76 (2014) 522–548. [24] J. Keim, A. Schwarz, P. Kopper, M. Blind, C. Rohde, A. Beck, Entropy Stable High-Order Discontinuous Galerkin Spectral-Element Methods on Curvilinear, Hybrid Meshes, Journal of Computational Physics 557 (2026) 114829. doi:10.1016/j.jcp. 2026.114829. [25] P. Mossier, P. Oestringer, S. Jöns, J. Keim, C. Mavriplis, A. D. Beck, C.-D. Munz, Tackling Compressible Turbulent Multi-Component Flows with Dynamic Hp-Adaptation 306 (2026) 106928. doi:10.1016/j.compfluid.2025.106928. [26] OpenMP, https://www.openmp.org/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-26-02. [27] OpenACC, https://www.openacc.org/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-26-02. [28] C. R. Trott, D. Lebrun-Grandié, D. Arndt, J. Ciesko, V. Dang, N. Ellingwood, R. Gayatri, E. Harvey, D. S. Hollman, D. Ibanez, N. Liber, J. Madsen, J. Miles, D. Poliakoff, A. Powell, S. Raja-manickam, M. Simberg, D. Sunderland, B. Turcksin, J. Wilke, Kokkos 3: Programming Model Extensions for the Exascale Era, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 33 (2022) 805–817. doi:10.1109/TPDS.2021.3097283. [29] Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, RAJA Portabil-ity Suite: Enabling Performance Portable CPU and GPU HPC Applications, https://computing.llnl.gov/projects/ raja-managing-application-portability-next-generation\ protect\penalty\z@-platforms, 2026. [30] E. Zenker, B. Worpitz, R. Widera, A. Huebl, G. Juckeland, A. Knüpfer, W. E. Nagel, M. Bussmann, Alpaka – An Ab-straction Library for Parallel Kernel Acceleration, in: 2016 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Sym-posium Workshops (IPDPSW), 2016, pp. 631–640. doi:10.1109/ IPDPSW.2016.50. [31] Khronos Group, SYCL, https://www.khronos.org/sycl/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-11-03. [32] NVIDIA, CUDA Fortran, https://developer.nvidia.com/ cuda-fortran, 2026. Accessed: 2026-26-02. [33] Fortran Community, Fortran: High-performance parallel pro-gramming language, https://fortran-lang.org/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-15-04. [34] S. Bak, C. Bertoni, S. Boehm, R. Budiardja, B. M. Chap-man, J. Doerfert, M. Eisenbach, H. Finkel, O. Hernandez, J. Huber, S. Iwasaki, V. Kale, P. R. Kent, J. Kwack, M. Lin, P. Luszczek, Y. Luo, B. Pham, S. Pophale, K. Ravikumar, V. Sarkar, T. Scogland, S. Tian, P. Yeung, OpenMP application experiences: Porting to accelerated nodes, Parallel Computing 

18 109 (2022) 102856. doi:10.1016/j.parco.2021.102856. [35] M. Bernardini, D. Modesti, F. Salvadore, S. Pirozzoli, STREAmS: A high-fidelity accelerated solver for direct nu-merical simulation of compressible turbulent flows, Computer Physics Communications 263 (2021) 107906. [36] F. Salvadore, G. Rossi, S. Sathyanarayana, M. Bernardini, OpenMP offload toward the exascale using Intel® GPU Max 1550: evaluation of STREAmS compressible solver, The Jour-nal of Supercomputing 80 (2024) 21094–127. [37] F. De Vanna, G. Baldan, URANOS-2.0: Improved performance, enhanced portability, and model extension towards exascale computing of high-speed engineering flows, Computer Physics Communications 303 (2024) 109285. [38] M. Solanki, AdaptiveCpp design and architecture, https://github.com/AdaptiveCpp/AdaptiveCpp/blob/ develop/doc/architecture.md, 2025. Accessed: 2026-09-03. [39] Z. Dai, L. Deng, Y. Che, M. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, Evalu-ating performance portability of five shared-memory program-ming models using a high-order unstructured CFD solver, Jour-nal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 187 (2024) 104831. doi:j.jpdc.2023.104831. [40] P. Bauman, B. Messer, J. Glenski, A. Georgiadou, J. Li-etz, K. Gottiparthi, M. Day, J. Chen, J. Rood, L. Esclapez, J. White III, G. R. Jansen, N. Curtis, S. Nichols, J. Kurzak, N. Chalmers, C. Freitag, N. Malaya, A. Fanfarillo, R. D. Bu-diardja, T. Papatheodore, N. Frontiere, D. Mcdougall, M. Nor-man, S. Sreepathi, P. Roth, D. Bykov, N. Wolfe, P. Mullowney, M. Eisenbach, M. T. Henry De Frahan, W. Joubert, Experi-ences readying applications for Exascale, in: Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, Association for Computing Machinery, 2023. doi:10.1145/3581784.3607065. [41] G. Nastac, A. Walden, E. J. Nielsen, K. Frendi, Implicit Thermochemical Nonequilibrium Flow Simulations on Unstruc-tured Grids using GPUs, in: AIAA Scitech 2021 Forum, 2021. doi:10.2514/6.2021-0159. [42] N. Jansson, M. Karp, J. Wahlgren, S. Markidis, P. Schlatter, Design of Neko—A Scalable High-Fidelity Simulation Frame-work With Extensive Accelerator Support, Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 37 (2025). [43] W. K. Anderson, R. T. Biedron, J.-R. Carlson, J. M. Derlaga, B. Diskin, C. T. Druyor Jr., et al, FUN3D Manual: 14.2, 2025. [44] G. Nastac, A. Walden, L. Wang, E. J. Nielsen, Y. Liu, M. Opgenorth, J. Orender, M. Zubair, A Multi-Architecture Approach for Implicit Computational Fluid Dynamics on Un-structured Grids, in: AIAA Scitech 2023 Forum, 2023. doi:10. 2514/6.2023-1226. [45] A. Harten, J. M. Hyman, Self Adjusting Grid Methods for One-Dimensional Hyperbolic Conservation Laws, Journal of Compu-tational Physics 50 (1983) 235–269. doi:10.1016/0021-9991(83) 90066-9. [46] F. Bassi, S. Rebay, A High-Order Accurate Discontinuous Finite Element Method for the Numerical Solution of the Compressible Navier-Stokes Equations, Journal of Computational Physics 131 (1997) 267–279. doi:10.1006/jcph.1996.5572. [47] P. Chandrashekar, Kinetic Energy Preserving and Entropy Sta-ble Finite Volume Schemes for Compressible Euler and Navier-Stokes Equations, Communications in Computational Physics 14 (2013) 1252–1286. doi:10.4208/cicp.170712.010313a. [48] M. Sonntag, Shape Derivatives and Shock Capturing for the Navier-Stokes Equations in Discontinuous Galerkin Meth-ods, Ph.D. thesis, Universität Stuttgart, 2017. doi:10.18419/ opus-9342. [49] P.-O. Persson, J. Peraire, Sub-Cell Shock Capturing for Discon-tinuous Galerkin Methods, 2006. doi:10.2514/6.2006-112. [50] M. H. Carpenter, A. Kennedy, Fourth-Order 2N-Storage Runge-Kutta Schemes, Nasa Technical Memorandum 109112 (1994) 1–26. [51] J. Niegemann, R. Diehl, K. Busch, Efficient Low-Storage Runge–Kutta Schemes with Optimized Stability Regions, Jour-nal of Computational Physics 231 (2012) 364–372. doi:10.1016/ j.jcp.2011.09.003. [52] A. Schwarz, D. Kempf, J. Keim, P. Kopper, C. Rohde, A. Beck, Comparison of Entropy Stable Collocation High-Order DG Methods for Compressible Turbulent Flows, Computers & Flu-ids 303 (2025) 106874. doi:10.1016/j.compfluid.2025.106874. [53] J. Reid, The new features of Fortran 2003 26 (2007) 10–33. doi:10.1145/1243413.1243415. [54] A. Klöckner, T. Warburton, J. Bridge, J. Hesthaven, Nodal discontinuous Galerkin methods on graphics processors, Journal of Computational Physics 228 (2009) 7863–7882. doi:j.jcp.2009. 06.041. [55] J. Chan, Z. Wang, A. Modave, J.-F. Remacle, T. Warbur-ton, GPU-accelerated discontinuous Galerkin methods on hy-brid meshes, Journal of Computational Physics 318 (2016) 142– 168. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2016.04.003. [56] A. Karakus, N. Chalmers, K. Świrydowicz, T. Warburton, AGPU accelerated discontinuous Galerkin incompressible flow solver, Journal of Computational Physics 390 (2019) 380–404. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2019.04.010. [57] NVIDIA, Nsight Compute™, https://developer.nvidia.com/ nsight-compute, 2026. Accessed: 2026-03-03. [58] D. A. Kopriva, A conservative staggered-grid chebyshev mul-tidomain method for compressible flows. ii. a semi-structured method, Journal of computational physics 128 (1996) 475–488. [59] P. J. Roache, Code verification by the method of manufactured solutions, J. Fluids Eng. 124 (2002) 4–10. [60] D. J. Lusher, N. D. Sandham, Assessment of low-dissipative shock-capturing schemes for the compressible Taylor–Green vor-tex, AIAA Journal 59 (2021) 533–545. [61] S. Sarkar, G. Erlebacher, M. Y. Hussaini, H. O. Kreiss, The analysis and modelling of dilatational terms in compressible tur-bulence, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 227 (1991) 473–493. [62] W. Sutherland, LII. The viscosity of gases and molecular force, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Mag-azine and Journal of Science 36 (1893) 507–531. doi:10.1080/ 14786449308620508. [63] Discoverer HPC, Discoverer HPC docs, https://docs.discoverer. bg/index.html, 2026. Accessed: 2026-19-02. [64] Höchstleistungsrechenzentrum Stuttgart (HLRS), Hunter (HPE), https://kb.hlrs.de/platforms/index.php/Hunter_ (HPE), 2026. Accessed: 2026-19-02. [65] CINECA HPC, Leonardo, https://www.hpc.cineca.it/systems/ hardware/leonardo/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-19-02. [66] Minho Advanced Computing Center (MACC), Deucalion User Guide, https://docs.macc.fccn.pt/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-19-02. [67] Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) Leadership Comput-ing Facility, Frontier User Guide, https://docs.olcf.ornl.gov/ systems/frontier_user_guide.html, 2026. Accessed: 2026-10-04. [68] Jülich Supercomputing Centre (JSC), JUPITER - Exascale for Europe, https://www.fz-juelich.de/en/jsc/jupiter, 2026. Ac-cessed: 2026-12-03. [69] IT4Innovations, Karolina, https://www.it4i.cz/en/ infrastructure/karolina, 2026. Accessed: 2026-19-02. [70] CSC - IT Center for Science, LUMI Documentation, https:// docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/firststeps/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-19-02. [71] Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), MareNostrum 5 Technical information, https://www.bsc.es/marenostrum/ marenostrum-5, 2026. Accessed: 2026-19-02. [72] LuxProvide, MeluXina, https://www.luxprovide.lu/meluxina/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-19-02. [73] Institute for Information Science, Maribor (IZUM), Vega, https: //izum.si/en/vega-en/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-19-02. [74] Advanced Micro Devices, AMD Instinct ™ MI250X Ac-celerators, https://www.amd.com/en/products/accelerators/ instinct/mi200/mi250x.html, 2026. [75] SchedMD, Slurm Workload Manager, https://slurm.schedmd. com/, 2026. Accessed: 2026-27-01. [76] Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), EAR: Energy management framework for HPC, https://www.bsc.es/ 

19 research-and-development/software-and-apps/software-list/ ear-energy-management-framework-hpc, 2026. Accessed: 2026-27-01. [77] P. Kopper, M. P. Blind, A. Schwarz, M. Kurz, F. Rodach, S. M. Copplestone, A. D. Beck, PyHOPE: A Python Toolkit for Three-Dimensional Unstructured High-Order Meshes, Jour-nal of Open Source Software 10 (2025) 8769. URL: https: //doi.org/10.21105/joss.08769. doi:10.21105/joss.08769. [78] Advanced Micro Devices, AMD CDNA ™ Architecture, https://www.amd.com/content/dam/amd/en/documents/ instinct-tech-docs/white-papers/amd-cdna-3-white-paper.pdf, 2025. Accessed: 2026-17-03. [79] Advanced Micro Devices, AMD EPYC ™ 7002 Series Processors, https://www.amd.com/content/dam/amd/en/documents/ products/epyc/amd-epyc-7002-series-datasheet.pdf, 2025. Accessed: 2026-17-03. [80] C. D. Pruett, T. B. Gatski, C. E. Grosch, W. D. Thacker, The temporally filtered Navier–Stokes equations: Properties of the residual stress, Physics of Fluids 15 (2003) 2127–2140. doi:10. 1063/1.1582858. [81] A. Rodde, J. Archambaud, OAT15A Airfoil Data. AGARD Ad-visory Report Num. 303 Volume 1: A Selection of Experimen-tal Test Cases for the Validation of CFD codes, Technical Re-port, Advisory Group for Aerospace Research & Development (AGARD), 1994. 

20